2 Chapter 1

The economic success of most firms depends on their ability to identify the needs of
customers and to quickly create products that meet these needs and can be produced at
low cost. Achieving these goals is not solely a marketing problem, nor is it solely a design
problem or a manufacturing problem; it is a product development problem involving all
of these functions. This book provides a collection of methods intended to enhance the
abilities of cross-functional teams to work together to develop products.

A product is something sold by an enterprise to its customers. Product development
is the set of activities beginning with the perception of a market opportunity and ending
in the production, sale, and delivery of a product. Although much of the material in this
book is useful in the development of any product, we explicitly focus on products that
are engineered, discrete, and physical. Exhibit 1-1 displays several examples of products
from this category. Because we focus on engineered products, the book applies better to
the development of power tools and computer peripherals than to magazines or sweaters.
Our focus on discrete goods makes the book less applicable to the development of prod-
ucts such as gasoline, nylon, and paper. Because of the focus on physical products, we do
not emphasize the specific issues involved in developing services or software. Even with
these restrictions, the methods presented apply well to a broad range of products, includ-
ing, for example, consumer electronics, sports equipment, scientific instruments, machine
tools, and medical devices.

The goal of this book is to present in a clear and detailed way a set of product devel-
opment methods aimed at bringing together the marketing, design, and manufacturing
functions of the enterprise. In this introductory chapter we describe some aspects of the
industrial practice of product development and provide a roadmap of the book.

Characteristics of Successful Product Development

From the perspective of the investors in a for-profit enterprise, successful product devel-
opment results in products that can be produced and sold profitably, yet profitability is
often difficult to assess quickly and directly. Five more specific dimensions, all of which
ultimately relate to profit, are commonly used to assess the performance of a product de-
velopment effort:

° Product quality: How good is the product resulting from the development effort? Does
it satisfy customer needs? Is it robust and reliable? Product quality is ultimately
reﬂected in market share and the price that customers are willing to pay.

° Product cost: What is the manufacturing cost of the product? This cost includes spend-
ing on capital equipment and tooling as well as the incremental cost of producing each
unit of the product. Product cost determines how much profit accrues to the firm for a
particular sales volume and a particular sales price.

° Development time: How quickly did the team complete the product development ef-
fort? Development time determines how responsive the firm can be to competitive
forces and to technological developments, as well as how quickly the firm receives the
economic returns from the team’s efforts.

° Development cost: How much did the firm have to spend to develop the product? De-
velopment cost is usually a significant fraction of the investment required to achieve
the profits.Introduction 3

° Development capability: Are the team and the firm better able to develop future prod-
ucts as a result of their experience with a product development project? Development
capability is an asset the firm can use to develop products more effectively and eco-
nomically in the future.

High performance along these five dimensions should ultimately lead to economic
success; however, other performance criteria are also important. These criteria arise from
interests of other stakeholders in the enterprise, including the members of the develop-
ment team, other employees, and the community in which the product is manufactured.
Members of the development team may be interested in creating an inherently exciting
product. Members of the community in which the product is manufactured may be con-
cerned about the degree to which the product creates jobs. Both production workers and
users of the product hold the development team accountable to high safety standards,
whether or not these standards can be justified on the strict basis of profitability. Other
individuals, who may have no direct connection to the firm or the product, may demand
that the product make ecologically sound use of resources and create minimal dangerous
waste products.

Who Designs and Develops Products?

Product development is an interdisciplinary activity requiring contributions from nearly
all the functions of a firm; however, three functions are almost always central to a product
development project:

0 Marketing: The marketing function mediates the interactions between the firm and its
customers. Marketing often facilitates the identification of product opportunities, the
definition of market segments, and the identification of customer needs. Marketing
also typically arranges for communication between the firm and its customers, sets
target prices, and oversees the launch and promotion of the product.

° Design: The design function plays the lead role in defining the physical form of the
product to best meet customer needs. In this context, the design function includes en-
gineering design (mechanical, electrical, software, etc.) and industrial design (aesthet-
ics, ergonomics, user interfaces).

° Manufacturing: The manufacturing function is primarily responsible for designing,
operating, and/or coordinating the production system in order to produce the product.
Broadly defined, the manufacturing function also often includes purchasing, distribution,
and installation. This collection of activities is sometimes called the supply chain.

Different individuals within these functions often have specific disciplinary training
in areas such as market research, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, materi-
als science, or manufacturing operations. Several other functions, including finance and
sales, are frequently involved on a part-time basis in the development of a new product.
Beyond these broad functional categories, the specific composition of a development
team depends on the particular characteristics of the product.

Few products are developed by a single individual. The collection of individuals de-
veloping a product forms the project team. This team usually has a single team leader,
who could be drawn from any of the functions of the firm. The team can be thought of as4 Chapter 1

 

 

 

  
 
 

 
 
 

Marketing
Professional

Purchasing
Specialist

   

 

    
   
 
 
 

 

TEAM
LEADER

Mechanical
Core Designer
Team

Extended Team
(Including Suppliers)

   
 
 
 
   

 
   

Electronics
Designer

Industrial
Designer

  

 

 

 

  
   

 

EXHIBIT 1 -2 The composition of a product development team for an electromechanical product of modest
complexity.

consisting of a core team and an extended team. In order to work together effectively,
the core team usually remains small enough to meet in a conference room, while the ex-
tended team may consist of dozens, hundreds, or even thousands of other members. (Even
though the term team is inappropriate for a group of thousands, the word is often used
in this context to emphasize that the group must work toward a common goal.) In most
cases, a team within the firm will be supported by individuals or teams at partner compa-
nies, suppliers, and consulting firms. Sometimes, as is the case for the development of a
new airplane, the number of external team members may be even greater than that of the
team within the company whose name will appear on the final product. The composition
of a team for the development of an electromechanical product of modest complexity is
shown in Exhibit 1-2.

Throughout this book we assume that the team is situated within a firm. In fact, a
for-profit manufacturing company is the most common institutional setting for product
development, but other settings are possible. Product development teams sometimes work
within consulting firms, universities, government agencies, and nonprofit organizations.Introduction 5

 

Stanley Tools Rollerblade Hewlett-Packard Volkswagen

Jobmaster ln-Line DeskJet New Beetle Boeing 777

Screwdriver Skate Printer Automobile Airplane
Annual 100,000 100,000 4 million 100,000 50
production units/year units/year units/year units/year units/year
volume
Sales lifetime 40 years 3 years 2 years 6 years 30 years
Sales price $5 $150 $130 $20,000 $260 million
Number of 3 parts 35 parts 200 parts 10,000 parts 130,000 parts
unique parts
(part numbers)
Development 1 year 2 years 1.5 years 3.5 years 4.5 years
time
Internal 3 people 5 people 100 people 800 people 6,800 people
development
team (peak size)
External 3 people 10 people 75 people 800 people 10,000 people
development
team (peak size)
Development $150,000 $750,000 $50 million $400 million $3 billion
cost
Production $150,000 $1 million $25 million $500 million $3 billion
investment

 

EXHIBIT 1 -3 Attributes of five products and their associated development efforts. All figures are approximate,
based on publicly available information and company sources.

Duration and Cost of Product Development

Most people without experience in product development are astounded by how much time
and money are required to develop a new product. The reality is that very few products
can be developed in less than 1 year, many require 3 to 5 years, and some take as long
as 10 years. Exhibit 1-1 shows five engineered, discrete products. Exhibit 1-3 is a table
showing the approximate scale of the associated product development efforts along with
some distinguishing characteristics of the products.

The cost of product development is roughly proportional to the number of people on
the project team and to the duration of the project. In addition to expenses for develop-
ment effort, a firm will almost always have to make some investment in the tooling and
equipment required for production. This expense is often as large as the rest of the prod-
uct development budget; however, it is sometimes useful to think of these expenditures as
part of the ﬁxed costs of production. For reference purposes, this production investment is
listed in Exhibit 1-3 along with the development expenditures.6 Chapter ‘I

The Challenges of Product Development

Developing great products is hard. Few companies are highly successful more than half
the time. These odds present a significant challenge for a product development team.
Some of the characteristics that make product development challenging are:

Trade-offs: An airplane can be made lighter, but this action will probably increase
manufacturing cost. One of the most difficult aspects of product development is recog-
nizing, understanding, and managing such trade-offs in a way that maximizes the suc-
cess of the product.

Dynamics: Technologies improve, customer preferences evolve, competitors introduce
new products, and the macroeconomic environment shifts. Decision making in an en-
vironment of constant change is a formidable task.

Details: The choice between using screws or snap-fits on the enclosure of a computer
can have economic implications of millions of dollars. Developing a product of even
modest complexity may require thousands of such decisions.

Time pressure: Any one of these difficulties would be easily manageable by itself
given plenty of time, but product development decisions must usually be made quickly
and without complete information.

Economics: Developing, producing, and marketing a new product requires a large in-
vestment. To earn a reasonable return on this investment, the resulting product must be
both appealing to customers and relatively inexpensive to produce.

For many people, product development is interesting precisely because it is challeng-

ing. For others, several intrinsic attributes also contribute to its appeal:

Creation: The product development process begins with an idea and ends with the
production of a physical artifact. When viewed both in its entirety and at the level of
individual activities, the product development process is intensely creative.

Satisfaction of societal and individual needs: All products are aimed at satisfying
needs of some kind. Individuals interested in developing new products can almost
always find institutional settings in which they can develop products satisfying what
they consider to be important needs.

Team diversity: Successful development requires many different skills and talents. As
a result, development teams involve people with a wide range of different training, ex-
perience, perspectives, and personalities.

Team spirit: Product development teams are often highly motivated, cooperative
groups. The team members may be colocated so they can focus their collective energy
on creating the product. This situation can result in lasting camaraderie among team
members.

Approach of This Book

We focus on product development activities that benefit from the participation of all the
core functions of the firm. For our purposes, we define the core functions as market-
ing, design, and manufacturing. We expect that team members have competence in one orIntroduction 7

more specific disciplines such as mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, indus-
trial design, market research, or manufacturing operations. For this reason, we do not
discuss, for example, how to perform a stress analysis or to create a conjoint survey.
These are disciplinary skills we expect someone on the development team to possess. The
integrative methods in this book are intended to facilitate problem solving and decision
making among people with different disciplinary perspectives.

Structured Methods

The book consists of methods for completing development activities. The methods are struc-
tured, which means we generally provide a step-by-step approach and often provide templates
for the key information systems used by the team. We believe structured methods are valu-
able for three reasons: First, they make the decision process explicit, allowing everyone on
the team to understand the decision rationale and reducing the possibility of moving forward
with unsupported decisions. Second, by acting as “checklists” of the key steps in a develop-
ment activity they ensure that important issues are not forgotten. Third, structured methods
are largely self-documenting; in the process of executing the method, the team creates a
record of the decision-making process for ﬁlture reference and for educating newcomers.

Although the methods are structured, they are not intended to be applied blindly. The
methods are a starting point for continuous improvement. Teams should adapt and modify
the approaches to meet their own needs and to reﬂect the unique character of their institu-
tional environment.

Industrial Examples

Each remaining chapter is built around an example drawn from industrial practice. The
major examples include the following: a wireless security system, a laser-based cat
toy, a digital copier, a cordless screwdriver, a mountain bike suspension fork, a power
nailer, a dose-metering syringe, an electric scooter, a computer printer, a mobile tele-
phone, office seating products, an automobile engine, a mobile robot, a seat belt system,
a coffee-cup insulator, a digital photo printer, and a microfilm cartridge. In most cases
we use as examples the simplest products we have access to that illustrate the important
aspects of the methods. When a screwdriver illustrates an idea as well as a jet engine, we
use the screwdriver. However, every method in this book has been used successfully in
industrial practice by hundreds of people on both large and small projects.

Although built around examples, the chapters are not intended to be historically accurate
case studies. We use the examples as a way to illustrate development methods, and in doing
so we recast some historical details in a way that improves the presentation of the material. We
also disguise much of the quantitative information in the examples, especially financial data.

Organizational Realities

We deliberately chose to present the methods with the assumption that the development
team operates in an organizational environment conducive to success. In reality, some or-
ganizations exhibit characteristics that lead to dysfunctional product development teams.
These characteristics include:

° Lack of empowerment of the team: General managers or functional managers may
engage in continual intervention in the details of a development project without a full
understanding of the basis for the team’s decisions.8 Chapter 1

° Functional allegiances transcending project goals: Representatives of marketing,
design, or manufacturing may inﬂuence decisions in order to increase the political
standing of themselves or their functions without regard for the overall success of the
product.

° Inadequate resources: A team may be unable to complete development tasks effec-
tively because of a lack of staff, a mismatch of skills, or a lack of money, equipment,
or tools.

° Lack of cross-functional representation on the project team: Key development deci-
sions may be made without involvement of marketing, design, manufacturing, or other
critical functions.

While most organizations exhibit one or more of these characteristics to some degree,
the significant presence of these problems can be so stiﬂing that sound development
methods are rendered ineffective. While recognizing the importance of basic organiza-
tional issues, we assume, for clarity of explanation, that the development team operates in
an environment in which the most restrictive organizational barriers have been removed.

Roadmap of the Book

We divide the product development process into six phases, as shown in Exhibit 1-4.
(These phases are described in more detail in Chapter 2, Development Processes and
Organizations.) This book describes the concept development phase in its entirety and the
remaining phases less completely, because we do not provide methods for the more fo-
cused development activities that occur later in the process. Each of the remaining chap-
ters in this book can be read, understood, and applied independently.

0 Chapter 2, Development Processes and Organizations, presents a generic product
development process and shows how variants of this process are used in different in-
dustrial situations. The chapter also discusses the way individuals are organized into
groups in order to undertake product development projects.

° Chapter 3, Opportunity Identification, describes a process for creating, identifying,
and screening ideas for new products.

0 Chapter 4, Product Planning, presents a method for deciding which products to de-
velop. The output of this method is a mission statement for a particular project.

° Chapters 5 through 9, Identifying Customer Needs, Product Specifications, Concept
Generation, Concept Selection, and Concept Testing, present the key activities of the
concept development phase. These methods guide a team from a mission statement
through a selected product concept.

0 Chapter 10, Product Architecture, discusses the implications of product architecture
on product change, product variety, component standardization, product performance,
manufacturing cost, and project management; it then presents a method for establish-
ing the architecture of a product.

0 Chapter 11, Industrial Design, discusses the role of the industrial designer and how
human interaction issues, including aesthetics and ergonomics, are treated in product
development.

0 Chapter 12, Design for Environment, considers the environmental impacts associated with
products and presents a method for reducing these impacts through better design decisions.Introduction 9

   
  
 

 
 

Phase 0
Planning

  
  

Phase 1

Concept
Development

  
  
  

  
 

Phase 2

System-Level
Design

Phase 4

Testing and
Refinement

   

Phase 5

  
   
    

Production
Ramp-Up

 

 

Chapter 2: Development Processes and Organizations

 

 

 

Chapter 3: Opportunity
Identification

 

 

 

 

Chapter 4: Product
Planning

 

 

 

Chapter 5: Identifying
Customer Needs

 

 

 

Chapter 6: Product Spec

ifications

 

 

 

Chapter 7: Concept
Generation

 

 

Chapter 8: Concept
Selection

Many More-Focused Development Methods

 

 

Chapter 9: Concept
Testing

 

 

 

 

Chapter 10: Product Architecture

 

 

 

Chapter 11: Industrial Design

 

 

 

Chapter 12: Design for Environment

 

 

 

 

Chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing

 

 

 

Chapter 14: Prototyping

 

 

 

Chapter 15: Robust Design

 

 

 

Chapter 16: Patents and Intellectual Property

 

 

 

Chapter 17: Product Development Economics

 

 

 

Chapter 18: Managing Projects

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 -4 The product development process. The diagram shows Where each of the integrative methods
presented in the remaining chapters is most applicable.

Chapter 13, Design for Manufacturing, discusses techniques used to reduce manufac-
turing cost. These techniques are primarily applied during the system-level and detail-
design phases of the process.

Chapter 14, Prototyping, presents a method to ensure that prototyping efforts, which
occur throughout the process, are applied effectively.

Chapter 15, Robust Design, explains methods for choosing values of design variables
to ensure reliable and consistent performance.

Chapter 16, Patents and Intellectual Property, presents an approach to creating a patent
application and discusses the role of intellectual property in product development.10 Chapter 1

° Chapter 17, Product Development Economics, describes a method for understanding
the inﬂuence of internal and external factors on the economic value of a project.

0 Chapter 18, Managing Projects, presents some fundamental concepts for understand-
ing and representing interacting project tasks, along with a method for planning and
executing a development project.

References and Bibliography

A wide variety of resources for this chapter and for the rest of the book are available
on the Internet. These resources include data, templates, links to suppliers, and lists of
publications. Current resources may be accessed via

www.u|rich-eppinger.net

Wheelwright and Clark devote much of their book to the very early stages of product
development, which we cover in less detail.
Wheelwright, Stephen C., and Kim B. Clark, Revolutionizing Product Development:
Quantum Leaps in Speed, Eﬂiciency, and Quality, The Free Press, New York, 1992.

Katzenbach and Smith write about teams in general, but most of their insights apply to
product development teams as well.
Katzenbach, Jon R., and Douglas K. Smith, The Wisdom of Teams: Creating the
High-Performance Organization, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 1993.

These three books provide rich narratives of development projects, including fascinating
descriptions of the intertwined social and technical processes.
Kidder, Tracy, The Soul of a New Machine, Avon Books, New York, 1981.

Sabbagh, Karl, Twenty-First—Century Jet: The Making and Marketing of the Boeing
777, Scribner, New York, 1996.

Walton, Mary, Car: A Drama of the American Workplace, Norton, New York, 1997.

Exercises

1. Estimate what fraction of the price of a pocket calculator is required to cover the cost
of developing the product. To do this you might start by estimating the information
needed to fill out Exhibit 1-3 for the pocket calculator.

2. Create a set of scatter charts by plotting each of the rows in Exhibit 1-3 against the
development cost row. For each one, explain why there is or is not any correlation. (For
example, you would first plot “annual production volume” versus “development cost”
and explain why there seems to be no correlation. Then repeat for each of the remain-
ing rows.)

Thought Question

1. Each of the chapters listed in Exhibit 1-4 presents a method for a portion of the prod-
uct development process. For each one, consider what types of skills and expertise
might be required. Can you make an argument for staffing the development team from
start to finish with individuals possessing all of these skills and areas of expertise?CHAPTER TWO

Development Processes
and Organizations

 

 

Courtesy of Tyco International

EXHIBIT 2-1

A Wireless security alarm system control panel, one of Tyco’s products.

111 2 Chapter 2

Tyco International is a leading manufacturer of sensors and controls, including home
and industrial security systems. One of Tyco’s products is the wireless security alarm
system control panel shown in Exhibit 2-1. Senior managers at Tyco wanted to establish
a common product development process structure that would be appropriate for all of
the many different operating divisions across the company. They also needed to create a
product development organization that would allow Tyco to compete effectively in a va-
riety of competitive business markets. Some of the questions Tyco faced were:

0 What are the key product development activities that must be included in every
project?

° What project milestones and review gates can be used to manage the overall develop-
ment process by phases?

° Is there a standard development process that will work for every operating division?
0 What role do experts from different functional areas play in the development process?

° Should the development organization be divided into groups corresponding to projects
or to technical and business functions?

This chapter helps to answer these and related questions by presenting a generic de-
velopment process and showing how this process can be adapted to meet the needs of
particular industrial situations. We highlight the activities and contributions of different
functions of the company during each phase of the development process. The chapter also
explains what constitutes a product development organization and discusses why different
types of organizations are appropriate for different settings.

The Product Development Process

A process is a sequence of steps that transforms a set of inputs into a set of outputs. Most
people are familiar with the idea of physical processes, such as those used to bake a cake
or to assemble an automobile. A product development process is the sequence of steps or
activities that an enterprise employs to conceive, design, and commercialize a product.
Many of these steps and activities are intellectual and organizational rather than physical.
Some organizations define and follow a precise and detailed development process, while
others may not even be able to describe their process. Furthermore, every organization
employs a process at least slightly different from that of every other organization. In fact,
the same enterprise may follow different processes for each of several different types of
development projects.
A well-defined development process is useful for the following reasons:

° Quality assurance: A development process specifies the phases a development project
will pass through and the checkpoints along the way. When these phases and check-
points are chosen wisely, following the development process is one way of assuring the
quality of the resulting product.

° Coordination: A clearly articulated development process acts as a master plan that
defines the roles of each of the players on the development team. This plan informs the
members of the team when their contributions will be needed and with whom they will
need to exchange information and materials.Development Processes and Organizations 13

° Planning: A development process includes milestones corresponding to the comple-
tion of each phase. The timing of these milestones anchors the schedule of the overall
development project.

° Management: A development process is a benchmark for assessing the performance
of an ongoing development effort. By comparing the actual events to the established
process, a manager can identify possible problem areas.

° Improvement: The careful documentation and ongoing review of an organization’s de-
velopment process and its results may help to identify opportunities for improvement.

The generic product development process consists of six phases, as illustrated in
Exhibit 2-2. The process begins with a planning phase, which is the link to advanced
research and technology development activities. The output of the planning phase is the
project’s mission statement, which is the input required to begin the concept development
phase and which serves as a guide to the development team. The conclusion of the prod-
uct development process is the product launch, at which time the product becomes avail-
able for purchase in the marketplace.

One way to think about the development process is as the initial creation of a wide set
of alternative product concepts and then the subsequent narrowing of alternatives and in-
creasing specification of the product until the product can be reliably and repeatably pro-
duced by the production system. Note that most of the phases of development are defined
in terms of the state of the product, although the production process and marketing plans,
among other tangible outputs, are also evolving as development progresses.

Another way to think about the development process is as an information-processing
system. The process begins with inputs such as the corporate objectives, strategic op-
portunities, available technologies, product platforms, and production systems. Various
activities process the development information, formulating specifications, concepts, and
design details. The process concludes when all the information required to support pro-
duction and sales has been created and communicated.

A third way to think about the development process is as a risk management system. In
the early phases of product development, various risks are identified and prioritized. As
the process progresses, risks are reduced as the key uncertainties are eliminated and the
functions of the product are validated. When the process is completed, the team should
have substantial confidence that the product will work correctly and be well received by
the market.

Exhibit 2-2 also identifies the key activities and responsibilities of the different func-
tions of the organization during each development phase. Because of their continuous
involvement in the process, we choose to articulate the roles of marketing, design, and
manufacturing. Representatives from other functions, such as research, finance, project
management, field service, and sales, also play key roles at particular points in the process.

The six phases of the generic development process are:

0. Planning: The planning activity is often referred to as “phase zero” because it
precedes the project approval and launch of the actual product development process.
This phase begins with opportunity identification guided by corporate strategy and in-
cludes assessment of technology developments and market objectives. The output of the
planning phase is the project mission statement, which specifies the target market for
the product, business goals, key assumptions, and constraints. Chapter 3, Opportunity31H;

 

 

 

E
m

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

j :1 a F D \CI E3 3
ha a c h E
o I. E
O
. Conce t S stem-Level Detail Testin and Production
Plannlng ’0‘} Develoanlent ’0‘, Y Design *<>> Design -><>-> Refinegrlnent +9 Ramp-Up *0
Marketing
I Articulate market I Collect I Develop p an I Develop I Develop I Place early
opportunity. customer needs. for product marketing plan. promotion and production
I Define market I Identify lead options and launch materials. with key
segments. users. extended I Facilitate field customers.
I Identify product family. testing.
competitive
products.
Design
I Consider product I Investigate I Develop I Define part I Test overall I Evaluate early
platform and feasibility product geometry. performance, production
architecture. of product architecture. I Choose reliability, and output.
I Assess new concepts. I Define major materials. durability.
technologies. I Develop sub-systems I Assign I Obtain
industrial design and interfaces. tolerances. regulatory
concepts. I Refine industrial I Complete approvals.
I Build and test design. industrial I Assess
experimental I Preliminary design control environmental
prototypes. component documentation. impact.
engineering. I Implement
design changes.
Manufacturing
I Identify production I Estimate I Identify I Define piece- I Facilitate I Begin full
constraints. manufacturing suppliers part production supplier operation of
I Set supply chain cost. for key processes. ramp-up. production
strategy. I Assess components. I Design tooling. I Refine system.
production I Perform make- I Define quality fabrication
feasibility. buy analysis. assurance and assembly
I Define final processes. processes.
assembly I Begin I Train workforce.
scheme. procurement I Refine quality
of long-lead assurance
tooling. processes.
Other Functions
I Research: I Finance: I Finance: I Sales: Develop I General
Demonstrate available Facilitate Facilitate make- sales plan. Management:
technologies. economic buy analysis. Conduct
I Finance: Provide analysis. I Service: Identify postproject
planning goals. I Legal: service issues. review.
I General Management: Investigate

Allocate project
resou rces.

patent issues.

 

EXHIBIT 2-2 The generic product development process. Six phases are shown, including some of the typical tasks
and responsibilities of the key business functions for each phase.Development Processes and Organizations 15

Identification, explains a process for gathering, evaluating, and choosing from a broad
range of product opportunities. Chapter 4, Product Planning, presents a discussion of the
subsequent product planning process.

1. Concept development: In the concept development phase, the needs of the target
market are identified, alternative product concepts are generated and evaluated, and one
or more concepts are selected for further development and testing. A concept is a descrip-
tion of the form, function, and features of a product and is usually accompanied by a set
of specifications, an analysis of competitive products, and an economic justification of
the project. This book presents several detailed methods for the concept development
phase (Chapters 5—9). We expand this phase into each of its constitutive activities in the
next section.

2. System-level design: The system-level design phase includes the definition of the
product architecture, decomposition of the product into subsystems and components, and
preliminary design of key components. Initial plans for the production system and final
assembly are usually defined during this phase as well. The output of this phase usually
includes a geometric layout of the product, a functional specification of each of the prod-
uct’s subsystems, and a preliminary process ﬂow diagram for the final assembly process.
Chapter 10, Product Architecture, discusses some of the important activities of system-
level design.

3. Detail design: The detail design phase includes the complete specification of the
geometry, materials, and tolerances of all of the unique parts in the product and the iden-
tification of all of the standard parts to be purchased from suppliers. A process plan is
established and tooling is designed for each part to be fabricated within the production
system. The output of this phase is the control documentation for the product—the draw-
ings or computer files describing the geometry of each part and its production tooling,
the specifications of the purchased parts, and the process plans for the fabrication and
assembly of the product. Three critical issues that are best considered throughout the
product development process, but are finalized in the detail design phase, are: materials
selection, production cost, and robust performance. These issues are discussed respec-
tively in Chapter 12, Design for Environment, Chapter 13, Design for Manufacturing, and
Chapter 15, Robust Design.

4. Testing and refinement: The testing and refinement phase involves the con-
struction and evaluation of multiple preproduction versions of the product. Early
(alpha) prototypes are usually built with production-intent parts—parts with the same
geometry and material properties as intended for the production version of the prod-
uct but not necessarily fabricated with the actual processes to be used in production.
Alpha prototypes are tested to determine whether the product will work as designed
and whether the product satisfies the key customer needs. Later (beta) prototypes are
usually built with parts supplied by the intended production processes but may not be
assembled using the intended final assembly process. Beta prototypes are extensively
evaluated internally and are also typically tested by customers in their own use envi-
ronment. The goal for the beta prototypes is usually to answer questions about perfor-
mance and reliability in order to identify necessary engineering changes for the final
product. Chapter 14, Prototyping, presents a thorough discussion of the nature and use
of prototypes.16 Chapter 2

5. Production ramp-up: In the production ramp-up phase, the product is made using
the intended production system. The purpose of the ramp-up is to train the workforce
and to work out any remaining problems in the production processes. Products produced
during production ramp-up are sometimes supplied to preferred customers and are care-
fully evaluated to identify any remaining ﬂaws. The transition from production ramp-up
to ongoing production is usually gradual. At some point in this transition, the product is
launched and becomes available for widespread distribution. A postlaunch project review
may occur shortly after the launch. This review includes an assessment of the project
from both commercial and technical perspectives and is intended to identify ways to im-
prove the development process for future projects.

Concept Development: The Front-End Process

Mission
Statement

_>

Because the concept development phase of the development process demands perhaps
more coordination among functions than any other, many of the integrative development
methods presented in this book are concentrated here. In this section we expand the con-
cept development phase into what we call the front-end process. The front-end process
generally contains many interrelated activities, ordered roughly as shown in Exhibit 2-3.

Rarely does the entire process proceed in purely sequential fashion, completing each
activity before beginning the next. In practice, the front-end activities may be overlapped
in time and iteration is often necessary. The dashed arrows in Exhibit 2-3 reﬂect the un-
certain nature of progress in product development. At almost any stage, new information
may become available or results learned that can cause the team to step back to repeat
an earlier activity before proceeding. This repetition of nominally complete activities is
known as development iteration.

The concept development process includes the following activities:

° Identifying customer needs: The goal of this activity is to understand customers’
needs and to effectively communicate them to the development team. The output of
this step is a set of carefully constructed customer need statements, organized in a hi-
erarchical list, with importance weightings for many or all of the needs. A method for
this activity is presented in Chapter 5, Identifying Customer Needs.

° Establishing target specifications: Specifications provide a precise description of
what a product has to do. They are the translation of the customer needs into technical
terms. Targets for the specifications are set early in the process and represent the hopes

 

 

 

<" <" <‘I <‘I <-I <-u <-‘
I I I I I I I
‘ l ' ' l ' ‘ Development
Identify Establish Generate Select Test Set Plan Plan
Customer —> Target —> Product —> Product —> Product —> Final —> Downstream —>
Needs Specifications Concepts Concept(s) Concept(s) Specifications Development

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Perform Economic Analysis
Benchmark Competitive Products

Build andTest Models and Prototypes

EXHIBIT 2-3 The many front-end activities comprising the concept development phase.Development Processes and Organizations 17

of the development team. Later these specifications are refined to be consistent with
the constraints imposed by the team’s choice of a product concept. The output of this
stage is a list of target specifications. Each specification consists of a metric, and mar-
ginal and ideal values for that metric. A method for the specification activity is given
in Chapter 6, Product Specifications.

Concept generation: The goal of concept generation is to thoroughly explore the space
of product concepts that may address the customer needs. Concept generation includes
a mix of external search, creative problem solving within the team, and systematic
exploration of the various solution fragments the team generates. The result of this
activity is usually a set of 10 to 20 concepts, each typically represented by a sketch and
brief descriptive text. Chapter 7, Concept Generation, describes this activity in detail.

Concept selection: Concept selection is the activity in which various product concepts
are analyzed and sequentially eliminated to identify the most promising concept(s).
The process usually requires several iterations and may initiate additional concept gen-
eration and refinement. A method for this activity is described in Chapter 8, Concept
Selection.

Concept testing: One or more concepts are then tested to verify that the customer
needs have been met, assess the market potential of the product, and identify any short-
comings that must be remedied during further development. If the customer response
is poor, the development project may be terminated or some earlier activities may be
repeated as necessary. Chapter 9, Concept Testing, explains a method for this activity.

Setting final specifications: The target specifications set earlier in the process are re-
visited after a concept has been selected and tested. At this point, the team must commit
to specific values of the metrics reﬂecting the constraints inherent in the product con-
cept, limitations identified through technical modeling, and trade-offs between cost and
performance. Chapter 6, Product Specifications, explains the details of this activity.

Project planning: In this final activity of concept development, the team creates a
detailed development schedule, devises a strategy to minimize development time,
and identifies the resources required to complete the project. The major results of the
front-end activities can be usefully captured in a contract book, which contains the
mission statement, the customer needs, the details of the selected concept, the product
specifications, the economic analysis of the product, the development schedule, the
project staffing, and the budget. The contract book serves to document the agreement
(contract) between the team and the senior management of the enterprise. A project
planning method is presented in Chapter 18, Managing Projects.

Economic analysis: The team, often with the support of a financial analyst, builds an
economic model for the new product. This model is used to justify continuation of the
overall development program and to resolve specific trade-offs between, for example,
development costs and manufacturing costs. Economic analysis is shown as one of the
ongoing activities in the concept development phase. An early economic analysis will
almost always be performed before the project even begins, and this analysis is up-
dated as more information becomes available. A method for this activity is presented
in Chapter 17, Product Development Economics.

Benchmarking of competitive products: An understanding of competitive products
is critical to successful positioning of a new product and can provide a rich source of1 8 Chapter 2

ideas for the product and production process design. Competitive benchmarking is per-
formed in support of many of the front-end activities. Various aspects of competitive
benchmarking are presented in Chapters 5—9.

° Modeling and prototyping: Every stage of the concept development process involves
various forms of models and prototypes. These may include, among others: early “proof-
of—concept” models, which help the development team to demonstrate feasibility; “form-
only” models, which can be shown to customers to evaluate ergonomics and style; spread-
sheet models of technical trade-offs; and experimental test models, which can be used to
set design parameters for robust performance. Methods for modeling, prototyping, and
testing are discussed throughout the book, including in Chapters 5—7, 9, 11, 14, and 15.

Adapting the Generic Product Development Process

The development process described by Exhibits 2-2 and 2-3 is generic, and particular
processes will differ in accordance with the unique context of the firm and the challenges
of any specific project. The generic process is most like the process used in a market-pull
situation: a firm begins product development with a market opportunity and then uses
whatever available technologies are required to satisfy the market need (i.e., the mar-
ket “pulls” the development decisions). In addition to the market-pull process outlined
in Exhibits 2-2 and 2-3, several variants are common and correspond to the following:
technology-push products, platform products, process-intensive products, customized
products, high-risk products, quick-build products, and complex systems. Each of these
situations is described below. The characteristics of these situations and the resulting de-
viations from the generic process are summarized in Exhibit 2-4.

Technology-Push Products

In developing technology-push products, the firm begins with a new proprietary technol-
ogy and looks for an appropriate market in which to apply this technology (that is, the
technology “pushes” development). Gore-Tex, an expanded Teﬂon sheet manufactured by
W. L. Gore Associates, is a striking example of technology push. The company has devel-
oped dozens of products incorporating Gore-Tex, including artificial veins for vascular
surgery, insulation for high-performance electric cables, fabric for outerwear, dental ﬂoss,
and liners for bagpipe bags.

Many successful technology-push products involve basic materials or basic process
technologies. This may be because basic materials and processes are deployed in thou-
sands of applications, and there is therefore a high likelihood that new and unusual char-
acteristics of materials and processes can be matched with an appropriate application.

The generic product development process can be used with minor modifications
for technology-push products. The technology-push process begins with the planning
phase, in which the given technology is matched with a market opportunity. Once this
matching has occurred, the remainder of the generic development process can be fol-
lowed. The team includes an assumption in the mission statement that the particular
technology will be embodied in the product concepts considered by the team. Although
many extremely successful products have arisen from technology-push development,
this approach can be perilous. The product is unlikely to succeed unless (I) the as-
sumed technology offers a clear competitive advantage in meeting customer needs, andDevelopment Processes and Organizations 19

 

Process Type

Generic
(Market-Pull)

Products

Technology-Push
Products

Platform
Products

Process-Intensive
Products

Customized
Products

High-Risk
Products

Quick-Build
Products

Complex
Systems

Description

The team begins with

a market opportunity
and selects appropriate
technologies to meet
customer needs.

The team begins with a new
technology, then finds an
appropriate market.

The team assumes that
the new product will be
built around an established
technological subsystem.

Characteristics of the
product are highly
constrained by the
production process.

New products are slight
variations of existing
configurations.

Technical or market
uncertainties create high
risks of failure.

Rapid modeling and
prototyping enables many
design—build—test cycles.

System must be
decomposed into several
subsystems and many
components.

Distinct Features

Process generally includes
distinct planning, concept
development, system—

level design, detail design,
testing and refinement, and

production ramp—up phases.

Planning phase involves
matching technology
and market. Concept
development assumes a
given technology.

Concept development
assumes a proven
technology platform.

Either an existing
production process must
be specified from the

start, or both product and
process must be developed
together from the start.

Similarity of projects allows
for a streamlined and highly
structured development
process.

Risks are identified early
and tracked throughout the
process.

Analysis and testing
activities take place as early
as possible.

Detail design and testing
phases are repeated a
number of times until the
product is completed or
time/budget runs out.

Subsystems and
components are developed
by many teams working in
parallel, followed by system
integration and validation.

Examples

Sporting goods, furniture,
tools.

Gore—Tex rainwear, Tyvek
envelopes.

Consumer electronics,
computers, printers.

Snack foods, breakfast
cereals, chemicals,
semiconductors.

Motors, switches,
batteries, containers.

Pharmaceuticals, space
systems.

Software, cellular phones.

Airplanes, jet engines,
automobiles.

 

EXHIBIT 2-4 Summary of variants of generic product development process.20 Chapter 2

(2) suitable alternative technologies are unavailable or very difficult for competitors to
utilize. Project risk can possibly be minimized by simultaneously considering the merit
of a broader set of concepts that do not necessarily incorporate the new technology. In
this way the team verifies that the product concept embodying the new technology is
superior to the alternatives.

Platform Products

A platform product is built around a preexisting technological subsystem (a technology
platform). Examples of such platforms include the Intel chipset in a personal computer,
the Apple iPhone operating system, and the blade design in a Gillette razor. Huge invest-
ments are made in developing such platforms, and therefore every attempt is made to in-
corporate them into several different products. In some sense, platform products are very
similar to technology-push products in that the team begins the development effort with
an assumption that the product concept will embody a particular technology. One differ-
ence is that a technology platform has already demonstrated its usefulness in the market-
place in meeting customer needs. The firm can in many cases assume that the technology
will also be useful in related markets. Products built on technology platforms are much
simpler to develop than if the technology were developed from scratch. For this reason,
and because of the possible sharing of costs across several products, a firm may be able
to offer a platform product in markets that could not justify the development of a unique
technology.

Process-Intensive Products

Examples of process-intensive products include semiconductors, foods, chemicals, and
paper. For these products, the production process places strict constraints on the proper-
ties of the product, so that the product design cannot be separated, even at the concept
phase, from the production process design. In many cases, process-intensive products are
produced in very high volumes and are bulk, as opposed to discrete, goods.

In some situations, a new product and new process are developed simultaneously. For
example, creating a new shape of breakfast cereal or snack food will require both product
and process development activities. In other cases, a specific existing process for making
the product is chosen in advance, and the product design is constrained by the capabilities
of this process. This might be true of a new paper product to be made in a particular paper
mill or a new semiconductor device to be made in an existing wafer fabrication facility.

Customized Products

Examples of customized products include switches, motors, batteries, and containers.
Customized products are slight variations of standard configurations and are typically
developed in response to a specific order by a customer. Development of customized
products consists primarily of setting values of design variables such as physical dimen-
sions and materials. Templates for specifying customized products may be provided with
online design tools. When a customer orders a new product, the firm executes a struc-
tured design and development process to create the product to meet the customer’s needs.
Such firms typically have created a highly detailed development process involving a well-
defined sequence of steps with a structured ﬂow of information (analogous to a produc-
tion process). For customized products, the generic process is augmented with a detailedDevelopment Processes and Organizations 21

description of the specific information-processing activities required within each of the
phases. Such development processes may consist of hundreds of carefully defined activi-
ties and may be highly automated.

High-Risk Products

The product development process addresses many types of risk. These include technical
risk (Will the product function properly?), market risk (Will customers like what the team
develops?), and budget and schedule risk (Can the team complete the project on time and
within budget?). High-risk products are those that entail unusually large uncertainties re-
lated to the technology or market so that there is substantial technical or market risk. The
generic product development process is modified in high-risk situations by taking steps to
address the largest risks in the early stages of product development. This usually requires
completing some design and test activities earlier in the process. For example, when
there is great uncertainty regarding customer acceptance of a new product, concept test-
ing using renderings or user-interface prototypes may be done very early in the process
in order to reduce the market uncertainty and risk. If there is high uncertainty related to
technical performance of the product, it makes sense to build working models of the key
features and to test these earlier in the process. Multiple solution paths may be explored
in parallel to ensure that one of the solutions succeeds. Design reviews must assess levels
of risk on a regular basis, with the expectation that risks are being reduced over time and
not being postponed.

Quick-Build Products

For the development of some products, such as software and many electronics products,
building and testing prototype models is such a rapid process that the design-build-test
cycle can be repeated many times. In fact, teams can take advantage of rapid iteration to
achieve a more ﬂexible and responsive product development process, sometimes called a
spiral product development process. Following concept development in this process, the
system-level design phase entails decomposition of the product into high-, medium-, and
low-priority features. This is followed by several cycles of design, build, integrate, and
test activities, beginning with the highest-priority items. This process takes advantage
of the fast prototyping cycle by using the result of each cycle to learn how to modify the
priorities for the next cycle. Customers may even be involved in the testing process after
one or more cycles. When time or budget runs out, usually all of the high- and medium-
priority features have been incorporated into the evolving product, and the low-priority
features may be omitted until the next product generation.

Complex Systems

Larger-scale products such as automobiles and airplanes are complex systems com-
prising many interacting subsystems and components. When developing complex
systems, modifications to the generic product development process address a number
of system-level issues. The concept development phase considers the architecture of
the entire system, and multiple architectures may be considered as competing concepts
for the overall system. The system-level design phase becomes critical. During this
phase, the system is decomposed into subsystems and these further into many compo-
nents. Teams are assigned to develop each component. Additional teams are assigned22 Chapter 2

the special challenge of integrating components into the subsystems and these into the
overall system.

Detail design of the components is a highly parallel process in which the many de-
velopment teams work at once, usually separately. Managing the network of interactions
across the components and subsystems is the task of systems engineering specialists of
many kinds. The testing and refinement phase includes not only component and system
integration, but also extensive testing and validation at all levels.

Product Development Process Flows

The product development process generally follows a structured ﬂow of activity and
information ﬂow. This allows us to draw process ﬂow diagrams illustrating the process,
as shown in Exhibit 2-5. The generic process ﬂow diagram (a) depicts the process used
to develop market-pull, technology-push, platform, process-intensive, customized, and
high-risk products. Each product development phase (or stage) is followed by a review
(or gate) to confirm that the phase is completed and to determine whether the project
proceeds. Quick-build products enable a spiral product development process (b) whereby
detail design, prototyping, and test activities are repeated a number of times. The pro-
cess ﬂow diagram for development of complex systems (0) shows the decomposition
into parallel stages of work on the many subsystems and components. Once the product

 

Planning

 

0 Concept 0 System-Level 3 Detail
Development Design Design

 

 

 

 

 

Testing and Production
+0, Refinement T<>> Ramp-Up +<>

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mission
Approval

 

 

 

 

Production
Approval

Concept
Review

Preliminary Design
Review

Critical Design
Review

(a) Generic Product Development Process

 

 

Planning

 

l Many Iteration Cycles
0 Concept 0 System-Level C . . Production 0
Development Design DeSIgn —’ Bu'ld —’ Test Ramp-Up

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mission
Approval

 

 

 

Concept
Review

Cycle Plan Cycle
Review Review

(b) Spiral Product Development Process

 

Design —> Test

 

 

 

Planning

 

0 Concept 0 System-Level
Development Design

 

 

 

 

 

Design —> Test

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Design —> Test

 

Mission
Approval
(c) Complex System Development Process

 

 

 

 

 

Production
Approval

Concept
Review

System
Review

 

 

 

 

 

Design —> Test

 

EXHIBIT 2-5 Process ﬂow diagrams for three product development processes.

Project
Review

Project
Review

Integrate 0 Validation O
and Test and Ramp-Up

Project
ReviewDevelopment Processes and Organizations 23

development process has been established within an organization, a process ﬂow diagram
is used to explain the process to everyone on the team.

The Tyco Product Development Process

Tyco is primarily a market-pull enterprise. This means that Tyco generally drives its
development projects based on a perceived market need and utilizes new or established
technologies to meet that need. Its competitive advantage arises from highly effective
marketing channels worldwide, strong brand recognition, a large installed base of equip-
ment, and an ability to integrate new technologies into its product lines. For this reason,
the technology-push process would not be appropriate. Most Tyco products are assembled
from components fabricated with relatively conventional processes such as molding,
machining, and electronics assembly. Products are generally customized for a particular
customer in the final sales and installation processes, so the development process at Tyco
is primarily aimed at creation of new models of products, rather than at the customization
of existing models.

Tyco therefore established a common product development process similar to the
generic phased process. The resulting Tyco Rally Point process ﬂow is illustrated in
Exhibit 2-6. Note that there are nine phases in the Rally Point process, with six of the
phases (from concept definition to process verification) comprising the fundamental
product development process activities. Each phase is followed by a critical review
(called a Rally Point), which is required to gain approval to proceed to the next phase. The
primary goal and key activities of each phase as well as the business function responsible
for each activity are shown in Exhibit 2-7.

Although Tyco established Rally Point as its standard process, Tyco managers realized
that this process would not be perfectly suitable for all Tyco development projects across
all business units. Therefore one key activity in the concept definition phase is to select
a Rally Point process variant if necessary. For example, some of Tyco’s new products are
based on existing technology platforms. To develop such derivative products, the team
assumes the use of the existing technology platform during concept development. Also,
some products are designed for specific customers as private-label variants of standard
Tyco products. In these cases, a streamlined process known as Rally Point E2 is used.
Nevertheless, the standard Rally Point product development process is the baseline from
which a particular project plan begins.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CONCEIVE DESIGN OPTIMIZE VERIFY
Concept Feasibility Preliminary Final Product Process Launch Post-Launch
Definition and Planning Design Design Verification Verification Assessment
RPO RP1 RP2 RP3 RP4 RP5 RP6 RP7 RP8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Courtesy of Tyco Internationa

EXHIBIT 2-6 Tyco’s Rally Point product development process includes nine distinct phases and review gates.Rally Point 0. Project 1. Concept 2. Feasibility 3. Preliminary 4. Final 5. Product 6. Process 8. Post-Launch
Phase Registration Definition and Planning Design Design Verification Veriﬁcation 7. Launch Assessment
Primary Goal Define project and Develop project Create product Create preliminary Detail and optimize Demonstrate Demonstrate Launch product Identify lessons
business unit needs concept and charter description detailed design design product process learned
performance performance
Marketing Identify customers Capture voice of the Develop marketing Review concepts with Initialize field trials Complete field Finalize pricing and Solicit customer
and Sales and market size customer and sales plans customers trials sales forecasts feedback and
satisfaction ratings
Describe competitive Analyze customer Create phase—in and Finalize training Complete sales and Measure sales vs.
features and benefits needs phase—out plans plans service training forecast
Identify target cost Document customer Complete phase—in
and price needs and phase—out
Engineering Identify project risks Identify critical—to— Create functional Conduct a preliminary Freeze hardware and Finalize design Obtain regulatory Finalize product

quality specs

Develop and select
concepts

Update project risks

specification and
performance metrics
Review concept
selection

Define product
architecture
Assess technical
failures modes

design review

Build and test alpha
prototypes

Assess product failure

modes

software design

Complete engineering

documentation

Draft technical
documentation
Secure beta
prototypes

documentation

Complete beta
prototype and field
testing

Apply for regulatory
approvals

approvals

metrics

 

Quality Assurance

Create preliminary
test plan

Test beta prototypes
for robustness

Complete quality
assurance testing

Conduct process
verification testing

 

 

 

 

 

Manufacturing Begin manufacturing Finalize bill of Update Run manufacturing Register obsolete
process development materials (BOM) manufacturing pilots and scrap products
control plans
Conduct a preliminary Develop Finalize
manufacturing process manufacturing manufacturing
review control plans control plans
Purchasin Create a su lier Identif lon lead— Verif su | chain
9 PP Y 9 Y PP Y
participation matrix time items readiness
Assess suppliers for
certification
Legal Search patents Identify trade Identify potential Prepare patent Assure trade
compliance issues patents applications compliance
Financial Prepare preliminary Refine business case Complete financial Monitor return on
business case package investment
Project Identify project Assess team Plan integrated product Update RP1—2 Update RP1—3 Update RP1—4 Update RPl—S Finalize all Document best
Management timing, resources, capabilities/skills development schedule deliverables deliverables deliverables deliverables deliverables practices

and capital
Prepare RPO
checklist & submit
for approval

Identify development

team members

Select a Rally Point
process variant
Prepare RPl
checklist & submit
for approval

Assign a project
manager

Update RPl
deliverables
Prepare RP2
checklist & submit
for approval

Prepare RP3
checklist & submit
for approval

Prepare RP4
checklist & submit
for approval

Prepare RPS
checklist & submit
for approval

Prepare RP6
checklist & submit
for approval

EXHIBIT 2-7 Key activities and the responsible functions comprising the Tyco Rally Point product development process.

Finalize launch plans
and documentation

Update RP1—6
deliverables
Prepare RP7
checklist & submit
for approval

Prepare RP8
checklist & submit
for approval

Courtesy of Tyco InternationalDevelopment Processes and Organizations 25

Product Development Organizations

In addition to crafting an effective development process, successful firms must organize
their product development staff to implement the process in an effective manner. In this
section, we describe several types of organizations used for product development and
offer guidelines for choosing among these options.

Organizations Are Formed by Establishing Links
among Individuals

A product development organization is the scheme by which individual designers and
developers are linked together into groups. The links among individuals may be formal or
informal and include, among others, these types:

° Reporting relationships: Reporting relationships give rise to the classic notion of
supervisor and subordinate. These are the formal links most frequently shown on an
organization chart.

° Financial arrangements: Individuals are linked by being part of the same financial
entity, such as a business unit or department within a firm.

° Physical layout: Links are created between individuals when they share the same of-
fice, ﬂoor, building, or site. These links are often informal, arising from spontaneous
encounters while at work.

Any particular individual may be linked in several different ways to other individuals.
For example, an engineer may be linked by a reporting relationship to another engineer in
a different building, while being linked by physical layout to a marketing person sitting
in the next office. The strongest organizational links are typically those involving perfor-
mance evaluation, budgets, and other resource allocations.

Organizational Links May Be Aligned with Functions,
Projects, or Both

Regardless of their organizational links, particular individuals can be classified in two
different ways: according to their function and according to the projects they work on.

0 A function (in organizational terms) is an area of responsibility usually involving
specialized education, training, or experience. The classic functions in product devel-
opment organizations are marketing, design, and manufacturing. Finer divisions than
these are also possible and may include, for example, market research, market strategy,
stress analysis, industrial design, human factors engineering, process development,
and operations management.

° Regardless of their functions, individuals apply their expertise to specific projects. In
product development, a project is the set of activities in the development process for a
particular product and includes, for example, identifying customer needs and generat-
ing product concepts.

Note that these two classifications must overlap: individuals from several different func-
tions will work on the same project. Also, while most individuals are associated with only
one function, they may contribute to more than one project. Two classic organizational26 Chapter 2

structures arise from aligning the organizational links according to function or according
to projects. In functional organizations, the organizational links are primarily among those
who perform similar functions. In project organizations, the organizational links are primar-
ily among those who work on the same project.

For example, a strict functional organization might include a group of marketing pro-
fessionals, all sharing similar training and expertise. These people would all report to the
same manager, who would evaluate them and set their salaries. The group would have its
own budget and the people may sit in the same part of a building. This marketing group
would be involved in many different projects, but there would be no strong organizational
links to the other members of each project team. There would be similarly arranged
groups corresponding to design and to manufacturing.

A strict project organization would be made up of groups of people from several dif-
ferent functions, with each group focused on the development of a specific product (or
product line). These groups would each report to an experienced project manager, who
might be drawn from any of the functional areas. Performance evaluation would be
handled by the project manager, and members of the team would typically be colocated
as much as possible so that they all work in the same office or part of a building. New
ventures, or “start-ups,” are among the most extreme examples of project organizations:
every individual, regardless of function, is linked together by a single project—the growth
of the new company and the creation of its product(s). In these settings, the president or
CEO can be viewed as the project manager. Established firms will sometimes form an au-
tonomous “tiger team” with dedicated resources for a single project when special focus is
required to complete an important development project.

The matrix organization was conceived as a hybrid of functional and project organiza-
tions. In the matrix organization, individuals are linked to others according to both the
project they work on and their function. Typically each individual has two supervisors,
one a project manager and one a functional manager. The practical reality is that either
the project or the function tends to have stronger links. This is because, for example,
both functional and project managers cannot independently assign their shared staff, they
cannot independently evaluate and determine the salaries of their subordinates, and both
functional and project organizations cannot easily be grouped together physically. As a
result, either the functional or the project organization tends to dominate.

Two variants of the matrix organization are called the heavyweight project organization
and lightweight project organization (Hayes et al., 1988). A heavyweight project organiza-
tion contains strong project links. The heavyweight project manager has complete budget
authority, is heavily involved in performance evaluation of the team members, and makes
most of the major resource allocation decisions. Although each participant in a project also
belongs to a functional organization, the functional managers have relatively little author-
ity and control. A heavyweight project team in various industries may be called an inte-
grated product team (IPT), a design-build team (DBT), or simply a product development
team (PDT). Each of these terms emphasizes the cross-functional nature of these teams.

A lightweight project organization contains weaker project links and relatively stron-
ger functional links. In this scheme, the project manager is more of a coordinator and
administrator. The lightweight project manager updates schedules, arranges meetings, and
facilitates coordination, but the manager has no real authority and control in the project
organization. The functional managers are responsible for budgets, hiring and firing, andDevelopment Processes and Organizations 27

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

General
Manager
Functional
Managers
O
8822 0832
General 0 O <l
80 :1] :1] Manager < 00 <] Q
_ OOQQ
88 :1] <1 IT/lgiteacgters OO <1 4
Functional Organization Project Organization
General
Manager
Functional .
mega?

 

 

 

 

O
O
A

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

O

 

AA

 

 

 

 

Lightweight
Project
Managers <

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0
General 0
0

Manager

Heavyweight O 0 <1
OOQQ mm 0044

Managers

 

 

 

 

 

AA AA

 

 

 

 

CC) 00

OCXDO
AA

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Lightweight Project Matrix Organization Heavyweight Project Matrix Organization
Adapted from Hayes et a1., 1988

EXHIBIT 2-8 Various product development organizations. For simplicity, three functions and three projects
are shown.

performance evaluation. Exhibit 2-8 illustrates the pure functional and project organiza-
tions, along with the heavyweight and lightweight variants of the matrix organization.

In this book we refer to the project team as the primary organizational unit. In this
context, the team is the set of all people involved in the project, regardless of the organi-
zational structure of the product development staff. In a functional organization, the team
consists of individuals distributed throughout the functional groups without any organiza-
tional linkages other than their common involvement in a project. In the other organiza-
tions, the team corresponds to a formal organizational entity, the project group, and has a
formally appointed manager. For this reason the notion of a team has much more meaning
in matrix and project organizations than it does in functional organizations.28 Chapter 2

Choosing an Organizational Structure

The most appropriate choice of organizational structure depends on which organizational
performance factors are most critical to success. Functional organizations tend to breed
specialization and deep expertise in the functional areas. Project organizations tend to
enable rapid and effective coordination among diverse functions. Matrix organizations,
being hybrids, have the potential to exhibit some of each of these characteristics. The fol-
lowing questions help guide the choice of organizational structure:

° How important is cross-functional integration? Functional organizations may exhibit
difficulty in coordinating project decisions that span the functional areas. Project or-
ganizations tend to enable strong cross-functional integration because of the organiza-
tional links of the team members across the functions.

° How critical is cutting-edge functional expertise to business success? When disci-
plinary expertise must be developed and retained over several product generations,
then some functional links are necessary. For example, in some aerospace companies,
computational fluid dynamics is so critical that the fluid dynamicists are organized
functionally to ensure the firm will have the best possible capability in this area.

° Can individuals from each function be fully utilized for most of the duration of a
project? For example, a project may require only a portion of an industrial designer’s
time for a fraction of the duration of a project. In order to use industrial design re-
sources efficiently, the firm may choose to organize the industrial designers function-
ally, so that several projects can draw on the industrial design resource in exactly the
amount needed for a particular project.

° How important is product development speed? Project organizations tend to allow
for conﬂicts to be resolved quickly and for individuals from different functions to
coordinate their activities efficiently. Relatively little time is spent transferring infor-
mation, assigning responsibilities, and coordinating tasks. For this reason, project or-
ganizations are usually faster than functional organizations in developing innovative
products. For example, consumer electronics manufacturers almost always organize
their product development teams by project. This allows the teams to develop new
products within the extremely short periods required by the fast-paced electronics
market.

Dozens of other issues confound the choice between functional and project organiza-
tions. Exhibit 2-9 summarizes some of the strengths and weaknesses of each organiza-
tional type, examples of the types of firms pursuing each strategy, and the major issues
associated with each approach.

Distributed Product Development Teams

It is well established that a highly effective way to organize a product development team
includes colocation of the team members at a single site. However, the use of modern
communication technology and digital development processes allows even globally dis-
tributed project teams to be effective. Reasons to utilize product development team mem-
bers located at multiple sites may include the following:

° Access to information about regional markets.
0 Availability of technical expertise.Development Processes and Organizations 29

 

Strengths

Weaknesses

Typical
Examples

Major Issues

Functional
Organization

Fosters development
of deep specialization
and expertise.

Coordination across
different functional
groups can be slow
and bureaucratic.

Customized products,
where development
involves slight
variations to a
standard design (e.g.,
motors, bearings,

packaging).

How to integrate
different functions
(e.g., marketing and
design) to achieve
business goals.

Matrix Organization

 

Lightweight
Project
Organization

Coordination and
administration of
projects is explicitly
assigned to a single
project manager.
Maintains development
of specialization and
expertise.

Requires more
managers and
administrators than
a non-matrix
organization.

Derivative products

in many automobile,
electronics, and
aerospace companies.

Heavyweight
Project
Organization

Provides integration
and speed benefits

of the project
organization.

Some of the
specialization of a
functional organization
is retained.

Requires more
managers and
administrators
than a non-matrix
organization.

New technology or
platform projects

in automobile,
electronics, and
aerospace companies.

How to balance functions and projects. How to
simultaneously evaluate project and functional

performance.

Project
Organization

Resources can be
optimally allocated
within the project
team.

Technical and market
trade—offs can be
evaluated quickly.

Individuals may
have difficulty
maintaining cutting-
edge functional
capabilities.

Start—up companies.
"Tiger teams" and
"skunkworks”
intended to achieve
breakthroughs.
Firms competing in
highly dynamic
markets.

How to maintain
functional expertise
over time.

How to share
learning from

one project to
another.

 

EXHIBIT 2-9

Characteristics of different organizational structures.

0 Location of manufacturing facilities and suppliers.

° Cost saving through lower wages.

° Outsourcing to increase product development capacity.

Notwithstanding the importance of using the right team members regardless of loca-
tion, firms implementing globally distributed product development have experienced
many challenges due to the weaker ties between team members separated by great dis-
tances. This may result in an increased number of design iterations and more difficult
project coordination, particularly when such teams are newly formed. Fortunately, organi-
zations having years of experience with global project teams report that distributed proj-
ects do work more smoothly over time.30 Chapter 2

The Tyco Product Development Organization

The primary functions involved in product development at Tyco are engineering, manu-
facturing, marketing, sales, purchasing, quality assurance, finance, legal, and project
management (as listed in Exhibit 2-7). Each of these functions has a manager who reports
to the general manager of the division. However, product development projects are led by
project managers, with the resources for each project drawn from the functional areas.

In terms of the variants described in Exhibits 2-8 and 2-9, product development at
Tyco primarily takes place in projects strongly reﬂecting a traditional functional organiza-
tion structure. Project leaders are given only indirect control of the functional resources
assigned to their teams. As explained above, a functional structure generally sacrifices
some project efficiency in favor of greater ongoing development of the functional skills.
To address this concern, Tyco has created a highly effective project management function,
with project leaders who know the Rally Point process and how to coordinate the activi-
ties across the functions. This organizational choice has indeed led to very good product
development performance for Tyco while maintaining very strong functional capabilities.

In recent years, Tyco has created new regional engineering centers at locations in high-
growth markets such as China and India. Engineers at these centers are able to support
product development projects across multiple Tyco business units around the world. This
arrangement improves project performance by augmenting any project team with addi-
tional technical resources on an as-needed basis, which is particularly helpful in the later
stages of the Rally Point process.

 

Summary

An enterprise must make two important decisions about the way it carries out product
development. It must define both a product development process and a product develop-
ment organization.

° A product development process is the sequence of steps an enterprise employs to con-
ceive, design, and commercialize a product.

° A well-defined development process helps to ensure product quality, facilitate coordi-
nation among team members, plan the development project, and continuously improve
the process.

0 The generic process presented in this chapter includes six phases: planning, concept
development, system-level design, detail design, testing and refinement, and produc-
tion ramp-up.

° The concept development phase requires tremendous integration across the differ-
ent functions on the development team. This front-end process includes identifying
customer needs, analyzing competitive products, establishing target specifications,
generating product concepts, selecting one or more final concepts, setting final speci-
fications, testing the concept(s), performing an economic analysis, and planning the
remaining project activities. The results of the concept development phase are docu-
mented in a contract book.

° The development process employed by a particular firm may differ somewhat from the
generic process described here. The generic process is most appropriate for market-pullDevelopment Processes and Organizations 31

products. Other types of products, which may require variants of the generic process,
include technology-push products, platform products, process-intensive products, cus-
tomized products, high-risk products, quick-build products, and complex systems.

° Regardless of the development process, tasks are completed by individuals residing in
organizations. Organizations are defined by linking individuals through reporting rela-
tionships, financial relationships, and/ or physical layout.

0 Functional organizations are those in which the organizational links correspond to the
development functions. Project organizations are those in which the organizational
links correspond to the development projects. Two types of hybrid, or matrix, organiza-
tion are the heavyweight project organization and the lightweight project organization.

° The classic trade-off between functional organizations and project organizations is be-
tween deep functional expertise and coordination efficiency.

° Globally distributed product development teams allow access to specialized resources,
market information, and/or technical expertise. However, global teams experience
higher project coordination costs.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the lntemet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

Staged product development processes have been dominant in manufacturing firms
for the past 30 years. Cooper describes the stage-gate process and many of its enabling
practices.

Cooper, Robert G., Winning at New Products: Accelerating the Process from Idea to
Launch, third edition, Perseus Books, Cambridge, MA, 2001.

The spiral product development process has evolved primarily within the software
industry; however, many aspects of spiral development can be applied in manufacturing
and other industries. McConnell describes spiral software development, along with
several other processes used to develop software products.
McConnell, Steve, Rapid Development: Taming Wild Software Schedules, Microsoft
Press, Redmond, WA, 1996.

The concept of heavyweight and lightweight project organizations is articulated by Hayes,
Wheelwright, and Clark. Wheelwright and Clark also discuss product strategy, planning,
and technology development activities, which generally precede the product development
process.
Hayes, Robert H., Steven C. Wheelwright, and Kim B. Clark, Dynamic Manufacturing:
Creating the Learning Organization, The Free Press, New York, 1988.

Wheelwright, Steven C., and Kim B. Clark, Revolutionizing Product Development:
Quantum Leaps in Speed, Eﬂiciency, and Quality, The Free Press, New York, 1992.

Andreasen and Hein provide some good ideas on how to integrate different functions in
product development. They also show several conceptual models of product development
organizations.
Andreasen, M. Myrup, and Lars Hein, Integrated Product Development, Springer-
Verlag, New York, 1987.32 Chapter 2

Exercises

Allen provides strong empirical evidence that physical layout can be used to create
significant, although informal, organizational links. He also discusses the use of matrix
organizations to mitigate the weaknesses of functional and project organizations.

Allen, Thomas 1., Managing the Flow of Technology: Technology Transfer and the

Dissemination of Technological Information within the R&D Organization, MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1977.

Galbraith’s seminal book on organizational design contains much useful information that
can be applied to product development. His 1994 book is an update of his earlier writing.

Galbraith, Jay R., Designing Complex Organizations, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA, 1973.

Galbraith, Jay R., Competing with Flexible Lateral Organizations, second edition,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1994.

1. Diagram a process for planning and cooking a family dinner. Does your process re-

semble the generic product development process? Is cooking dinner analogous to a
market-pull, technology-push, platform, process-intensive, customization, high-risk,
quick-build, or complex system process?

. Define a process for finding a job. For what types of endeavor does a well-defined

process enhance performance?

. What type of development process would you expect to find in an established com-

pany successful at developing residential air-conditioning units? How about for a small
company that is trying to break into the market for racing wheelchairs?

. Sketch the organization (in some appropriate graphical representation) of a consulting

firm that develops new products for clients on a proj ect-by-proj ect basis. Assume that
the individuals in the firm represent all of the different functions required to develop a
new product. Would this organization most likely be aligned with functions, be aligned
by projects, or be a hybrid?

Thought Questions

1. What role does basic technological research play in the product development process?

How would you modify Exhibit 2-3 to better represent the research and technology de-
velopment activities in product development?

. Is there an analogy between a university and a product development organization? Is a

university a functional or project organization?

. What is the product development organization for students engaged in projects as part

of a product development class?

. Is it possible for some members of a product development organization to be orga-

nized functionally, while others are organized by project? If so, which members of the
team would be the most likely candidates for the functional organization?CHAPTER THREE

Opportunity
Identification‘

 

Courtesy of Lucky Litter LLC and FroliCat

EXHIBIT 3-1
The Bolt laser-based cat toy, the original product of the FroliCat brand.

1 Many of the ideas in this chapter were developed in collaboration with Christian Terwiesch, and are
described in more detail in the book Innovation Tournaments (TenNiesch and Ulrich, 2009).

3334 Chapter 3

The pet products company FroliCat had introduced two successful laser-based cat toys,
including the Bolt (Exhibit 3-1), a product that embodies a randomly moving laser beam
to entertain cats. The company’s management team, hoping to build upon their initial
success, sought additional opportunities to develop new cat toys. They were particularly
interested in opportunities to extend their brand to other types of motion-based cat toys.
FroliCat was a small company, and so an investment in developing a new product repre-
sented substantial financial risk. As a result, the team hoped to identify opportunities that
would be highly likely to result in profitable products.

FroliCat was based in Chicago, but because all of FroliCat’s products were produced
by factories in China, and because it wished to adopt a more global market perspective, it
engaged a Shanghai-based product development consulting firm, Asentio Design, to lead
the opportunity identification effort.

This chapter provides a conceptual foundation for opportunity identification, and ar-
ticulates a six-step process, which includes generating a large number of alternatives and
filtering them to identify those that are exceptionally promising. We illustrate the oppor-
tunity identification process using the FroliCat example.

What Is an Opportunity?

In the context of product development, an opportunity is an idea for a new product. An
opportunity is a product description in embryonic form, a newly sensed need, a newly
discovered technology, or a rough match between a need and a possible solution. At the
earliest stage of development, uncertainty clouds the future, so an opportunity can be
thought of as a hypothesis about how value might be created. For a consumer-products
company like Procter & Gamble, an opportunity might be a new type of cleaner sug-
gested by a customer. For a materials company like 3M, it might be a new polymer with
unusual properties. Some opportunities ultimately become new products while others
never warrant substantial further development.

An opportunity for a new product is usually articulated with less than one page of
information, often including a descriptive title, a narrative explaining the idea, and some-
times including a sketch of a possible product concept. Exhibit 3-2 shows the opportunity
eventually pursued by FroliCat as it was first articulated following a brainstorming ses-
sion by members of the team. The opportunity was for an interactive cat toy consisting of
a swinging object hanging from the underside of a table, which would be moved around
by a hand from above. This is an example of an opportunity that includes a possible solu-
tion concept, which is typical for efforts focused on identifying opportunities for new
products in a well-defined category like cat toys.

Types of Opportunities

While there are many ways to categorize opportunities, two dimensions are particularly
useful. They are (l) the extent to which the team is familiar with the solution likely to be
employed, and (2) the extent to which the team is familiar with the need that the solutionOpportunity Identification 35

 

 

Courtesy of Lucky Litter LLC and Future Life Labs

EXHIBIT 3-2 The “swinging ball” opportunity eventually pursued by the FroliCat team
as first recorded in a sketch. This is an example of an opportunity that includes a potential
solution concept.

addresses. For technology-based products, these dimensions can also be thought of as
knowledge of the technology and knowledge of the market. These two dimensions are
illustrated in Exhibit 3-3.

Because risk of failure increases as opportunities deviate from what the team already
knows well, we can divide the opportunity landscape into categories based on the uncer-
tainty “horizon” faced by the team. Horizon 1 opportunities are largely improvements,
extensions, variants, and cost reductions of existing products for existing markets. They
are relatively low-risk opportunities. Horizon 2 opportunities push out into less known
territory in one or both of the dimensions of the market or the technology. Horizon 3 op-
portunities represent attempts to exploit opportunities that in some way are new to the
world, embodying the highest level of uncertainty.

Because of the need to launch a product within about a year, the FroliCat team explic-
itly avoided Horizon 3 opportunities. The team wished to build on its initial success with
the Bolt cat toy, and so focused on its existing customers and the existing needs it already
addressed. It sought a next-generation solution for the existing need to entertain cats, and
thus focused on Horizon 2 opportunities.36 Chapter 3

 

New

    
  
  
  

 

 

 

 

Exploration into New-category
need/market
new markets products and
service
‘6; '36,.
x ’e
E 0/,
E 6’
E O
a: '00
a) O
:5 Q0
53 Existin - 0’5"
as 9 Adjacent ’96,
:5— need/market growth 2‘
a: that 0,)
d)
2 we do not 90
“5 address 0.00
g 7!, .
-o
2
E o
c 0.00
x ’29 _ Exploration
Existing Improvements, 0’5“ Next generation with new
need/market that extensions, ’0‘, products and services solutions
we currently variants, for core markets approaches
serve and cost reductions
Existing Existing New
solution that solution that solution
we currently use we do not use

Knowledge of Solution (e.g., method/process/technology)

EXHIBIT 3-3 Types of opportunities. Horizons l, 2, and 3 represent increasing levels of risk,
reﬂecting different types of uncertainty.

Source: Terwiesch and Ulrich (2009)

Tournament Structure of Opportunity Identification

Opportunities vary widely in value; however, that value is plagued by uncertainty. It is
therefore very useful to identify a set of opportunities and then to select a subset for fur-
ther development, with just a few coming to fruition. This process can be thought of as
an innovation tournament, with only the best ideas prevailing. In most settings, dozens,
hundreds, or even thousands of opportunities are considered for every one commercial
success. A filtering process selects a subset for further development and, from those,
picks one or more “champions” that will be launched as full product development efforts.
Exhibit 3-4 illustrates this tournament structure.

The opportunity identification process embodied in an innovation tournament pre-
cedes the product development process as shown in Exhibit 3-4. While both the opportu-
nity identification process and the product development process consist of development
steps and selection steps, the overarching goals of the two activities are quite different. In
opportunity identification, the goal is to generate a large number of opportunities and ef-
ficiently kill those that are not worthy of further investment. In the product developmentOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Opportunity Identification 37

 

 

 

 

 

 

O
O \ ' /
79: O
O
O
O \ O
O O—>.
O
O
O — O
0 Concept System—Level Detail Testing & Production
0 0 >0 . . .
0 Development Desngn Desngn Refinement Ramp—Up
O
0 Product Development Process
0
O O
/ O
O O
O

Opportunity Identification Process

EXHIBIT 3-4 The tournament structure of the opportunity identification process. The opportunity tournament
feeds the product development process with exceptional opportunities.

Source: Terwiesch and Ulrich (2009)

process, the goal is to take the opportunity articulated in the mission statement and do
everything possible to assure it becomes the best product it can be.

Although opportunity identification and product development can be thought of as
separate activities, there is clearly some overlap between them. For example, in a consumer
product business like FroliCat, preliminary product concepts are almost always gener-
ated and explored with prototypes during the opportunity identification process, before a
formal product development process begins. However, these exploratory activities are typi-
cally conducted for several alternative opportunities, with only the most promising pro-
ceeding to more comprehensive product design and development. Exhibit 3-5 illustrates
the opportunity identification tournament structure used by FroliCat, starting with 50 op-
portunities and eventually resulting in one chosen to go into full product development.

Effective Opportunity Tournaments

Given that great opportunities are rare, how can the opportunity identification process
be managed to increase the number of excellent opportunities identified? There are three
basic ways.

1. Generate a large number of opportunities. If you produce more opportunities,
you’ll see more exceptional ones. The logic here is simple: on average, if you find one
7-foot (213 cm) tall person per 100,000 people, you’ll find two among 200,000. Creat-
ing more opportunities (without sacrificing their average quality) is thus a key lever in
finding the exceptional few.38 Chapter 3

  
 

‘ 1 Opportunity Articulated

as a Mission Statement for
Product DevelopmentTeam

 

3 Opportunities with
Exploratory Prototypes
and Sample Packaging

OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

50 Raw Opportunities 7 Opportunities with
Representative
Product Concepts

Images courtesy of Lucky Litter LLC and Future Life Labs

EXHIBIT 3-5 The overall tournament structure of the opportunity identification process for FroliCat. Fifty raw
opportunities were eventually filtered and explored, resulting in a “swinging ball” opportunity that was developed into
a product launched to the market.Opportunity Identification 39

2. Seek high quality of the opportunities generated. Adopting better methods for
generating opportunities and mining better sources of opportunities can increase the
average quality of the opportunities under consideration, which will also increase the
quality of the best ideas resulting from the tournament.

3. Create high variance in the quality of opportunities. This is a direct, though not im-
mediately obvious, implication of statistics. Holding the average quality and number
of opportunities constant, you’ll generate more exceptional ones from a process that
exhibits greater variability; that is, if it’s less consistent in the quality of its output. The
quest for variability contradicts normal approaches to process improvement, but it’s ex-
actly what you want in opportunity creation. Generating wacky ideas and wild notions
increases the chance that at least one of the opportunities will be exceptionally good.

Opportunity Identification Process

We divide the opportunity identification process into six steps as follows:

Establish a charter.

Generate and sense many opportunities.
Screen opportunities.

Develop promising opportunities.
Select exceptional opportunities.

99:5?”N1‘

Reﬂect on the results and the process.

Each step is the focus of a section of this chapter.

Step 1: Establish a Charter

Organizations create new products to achieve goals such as growing revenues from exist-
ing customers, filling a hole in a product line, or entering new market segments. Entre-
preneurs starting new organizations also have goals like creating a new product related to
an area of personal interest. The innovation charter articulates these goals and establishes
the boundary conditions for an innovation effort. Charters are closely analogous to (al-
though somewhat broader than) the mission statement for a new product. (See Chapter 4,
Product Flaming.)
For example, the charter for the FroliCat effort was:

Create a physical product in the cat toy category that we can launch to the market within
about a year through our existing retail sales channel.

The main restrictions in this charter were the emphasis on physical goods instead of
software or services, a focus on the cat toy category, a preference for opportunities that
would not require enormous investments of calendar time, and a desire to take advantage
of the company’s existing relationships with retailers.

The charter requires resolving a tension between leaving the innovation problem un-
constrained, and specifying a direction that is likely to meet the goals of the team and
organization. By specifying a narrow charter, the team avoids wasting effort generating40 Chapter 3

opportunities in areas that are unlikely to be pursued. On the other hand, sometimes decid-
ing which opportunities are worthy of pursuit in advance and in the abstract is difficult.
Similar to the mission statement for a new product, we recommend that the innova-
tion charter be broad, perhaps a bit broader than the team is comfortable with. Generating
ideas is inexpensive, and sharpening the focus later is not difficult. The benefit of allow-
ing a broad focus is that opportunities that may otherwise have never been considered will
challenge the team’s assumptions about what kinds of opportunities it should pursue.

Step 2: Generate and Sense Many Opportunities

Based on a survey of companies across many industries, about half of innovation op-
portunities are generated internally to an organization and about half are recognized from
customers and other external sources (Terwiesch and Ulrich, 2009). The distribution of
sources of opportunities is shown in Exhibit 3-6.

We therefore recommend that the team explicitly focus on both internal and external
sources of opportunities. Typically, the team will want to identify dozens if not hundreds
of raw opportunities. Fortunately, this daunting task is made much easier through the
application of some structured techniques, which we outline here.

Techniques for Generating Opportunities

For some creative people there is nothing more fun than coming up with new ideas. How-
ever, we find that the majority of people have a hard time when asked simply to generate
some promising opportunities. For them the problem of coming up with something new
is simply too abstract, too unstructured, and has too many degrees of freedom. Following
are seven basic techniques for stimulating the identification of opportunities. Most work
well in both entrepreneurial and corporate settings.

Internally generated
Customer
Competitive product
Sales force
University
Independent inventor
Distribution partner

Other partner company

 

 

 

 

 

Supplier

 

1O 20 30 40 50 60
EXHIBIT 3-6 The distribution of sources of opportunities in innovation.

Source: Terwiesch and Ulrich (2009).Opportunity Identiﬁcation 41

 

EXHIBIT 3-7 Nutrient delivery system worn during testing by the inventor, Matt Kressy
(nutrient pouch, tubing, and valve on his right side).

Follow a Personal Passion

List your passions—endeavors that keep you awake with excitement—and then consider
how emerging technologies, trends, and business models might inﬂuence them. Or iden-
tify unmet needs that you have in connection with a personal interest. An avid bicyclist
whom we know has been developing a nutrient delivery system for use with existing
hydration backpacks (for example, CamelBak), which has applications for the military
and for a wide variety of sports (Exhibit 3-7). He identified the opportunity while reﬂect-
ing on his desire to adjust the amount of sugar and electrolytes in the beverages in his
hydration pack.

Compile Bug Lists

Successful innovators are often chronically dissatisfied with the world around them. They
notice unmet needs of users, including themselves. List (or photograph) every annoyance
or frustration you encounter over a period of days or weeks and then pick the most univer-
sal and vexing ones and dream up solutions. Any problem is an opportunity.

An annoyance that gives birth to the opportunity doesn’t have to be yours alone. In-
stead, you might find it through customer complaints or market research. A powerful way
to understand others’ annoyances is to immerse yourself in the world of people using your
products or services.

Pull Opportunities from Capabilities

Theories of competitive advantage abound, but most spring from the idea that firms
achieve above-average profits by exploiting unique resources. Resources, an umbrella42 Chapter 3

term, includes capabilities, core competencies, and competitive advantage. To provide
advantage, a resource must be:

° Valuable. To be valuable, a resource must either allow a firm to achieve greater per-
formance than competitors or reduce a weakness relative to competitors.

0 Rare. Given competition, a valuable resource must be rare.
0 Inimitable. For value and rarity to persist, a resource must not be easily imitated.

° Nonsubstitutable. Even if valuable, rare, and inimitable, a resource providing advan-
tage can’t be easily substituted.

This perspective, abbreviated as VRIN, can be used to define targets by first articu-
lating an inventory of resources and then using the inventory as a lens for opportunity
generation.

Apple Computer’s VRIN resources, for example, might include excellence in industrial
design, a leading brand, and a loyal customer base. Each of these resources can guide the
opportunity creation process by reformulating them as a challenge. For example: In what
other product categories might Apple’s design excellence create advantage? For which
product or service categories could the Apple brand be deployed to advantage? What
other products or services could Apple provide to its customer base?

Study Customers

Opportunities can be identified by studying customers in a selected market segment.
These studies (also called user anthropology or consumer ethnography) provide a deeper
understanding of the true customer needs than you can obtain through surveys.

Consider the bicycle industry. Shimano, a maker of bike components like pedals and
brakes, recently commissioned a user-anthropology study to understand why more people in
the United States don’t ride bikes. The traditional approach to this problem would have been
to create a survey or a set of focus groups, asking customers how often they ride and what at-
tributes of a bike they value the most. Most likely, most Americans would say that they ride
regularly (which for some might mean once a year) and that they want light bikes with many
gears. Those, after all, are the product attributes emphasized in nearly every bike shop.

Unfortunately, what people say to researchers and what they really do can differ sub-
stantially. By spending many hours observing potential cyclists, including time on and off
bicycles, Shimano’s researchers found that many consumers want bikes that are techni-
cally simple, easy to ride, and easy to get on and off—all attributes that aren’t emphasized
in the current competition among bicycle manufacturers, who tend to emphasize the
needs of biking enthusiasts.

User anthropology thus helped Shimano to identify a set of latent needs. (See Chap-
ter 5, Identifying Customer Needs, for a description of latent needs.) When a latent need
is articulated, it becomes a target for the opportunity creation process. Once they identi-
fied the factors that keep many potential customers in their automobiles as opposed to on
their bikes, they had the opportunity to redefine the product category.

In the case of Shimano, these efforts led to the creation of bikes targeted specifically
at the leisure rider, that is, people who might rent a bike during their annual family trip
to the beach but otherwise weren’t riding regularly. Shimano developed a line of com-
ponents under the brand Coasting, and manufacturers then incorporated them into their
bikes. One example is the Trek Lime, shown in Exhibit 3-8.Opportunity Identification 43

 

Courtesy of Trek

EXHIBIT 3-8 The Trek Lime bicycle incorporating the Shimano Coasting component group.

Consider Implications of Trends

Changes in technology, demography, or social norms often create innovation opportuni-
ties. Ubiquitous mobile telephone service, for example, enables a wide variety of infor-
mation delivery services. An increasing Spanish-speaking population in the United States,
for example, enables new sorts of Spanish-language media. Growing environmental
awareness creates a market for green products and services. Once again, the means of
exploration is easy: list social, environmental, technological, or economic trends and then
imagine innovation opportunities made possible by each one.

Imitate, but Better

When another firm innovates successfully, it in effect publishes the location of a gold
mine. You can exploit this information by either considering alternative solutions that
could address the same need or alternative needs that could be addressed with the same
solution. Exhibit 3-9 shows examples of the imitate-but-better approach. Here are some
sources of opportunities for imitation:

° Media and marketing activities of other firms. Scan the media and monitor the activi-
ties of other firms by attending trade shows and following patent filings, for example.
Articulate the need and solution associated with any innovation that you identify.
Generate alternative approaches to meeting the need or alternative needs that can be
addressed with the new approach.

0 De-commoditize a commodity. Often, price competition characterizes a product cate-
gory, and the offerings themselves are little more than commodities. Recall coffee before
Starbucks or breath mints before Altoids. A situation like this creates an opportunity for
innovation. To pursue this kind of innovation, list all of the inexpensive, undifferentiated
products or services in a category and then consider the possibility of deluxe versions.44 Chapter3

© Stockbyte/PunchStock

r

 

SMC Photos

   

The McGraw-Hill Companies,
Inc./ J ill Braaten, photographer
© Ingram Publishing/Alamy

   

SMC Photos SMC Photos

Existing Product “Imitate-but-Better” Product
EXHIBIT 3-9 Examples of the imitate-but-better approach: SpinBrush, Starbucks, Altoids.Opportunity Identification 45

° Drive an innovation “down market.” Four entrepreneurs with a history in the toy and
candy businesses invented the Crest SpinBrush in 1998. They believed that their com-
petitive advantage was in creating small, cheap, battery-powered devices, as they had
done with the Spin Pop, a lollipop spun by a little motor. They were struck by the array
of electric toothbrushes, many selling for about $100, yet none having much more
complexity than their spinning lollipops. They decided to “create an electric tooth-
brush that can sell for six dollars.” Their SpinBrush became the best selling toothbrush
of any type. To follow their example, list the premium products or services in a cate-
gory and then imagine much cheaper versions that provide many of the same benefits.

° Import geographically isolated innovations. Innovations are often geographically
isolated, particularly if introduced by smaller firms. Translating the innovation from
one geographic region to another can be a source of innovation. The Red Bull energy
drink started as a product for Thai truck drivers. Starbucks founder Howard Schultz
created the chain after visiting Milan and becoming infatuated with its cafe culture and
espresso-based drinks.

Mine Your Sources

Recall that about half of product opportunities arise from sources inside an organization
and about half come from outside sources. As a result, you benefit from cultivating exter-
nal sources of ideas. Those sources include the following:

° Lead users. Firms have ample incentive to innovate. Innovation, after all, can result
in new sources of cash. But lead users and independent inventors may have even greater
incentives. Lead users are people or firms that have advanced needs that may not be met
by existing products or services. Lead users must either tolerate their unmet needs or
innovate themselves to address them. Many devices and procedures in health care were
invented by clinicians. For example, consider Dr. Lillian Aronson, a veterinarian at the
University of Pennsylvania who performs feline liver transplants. Her procedure is rela-
tively new, the market is small, and few existing surgical tools fit the task. Dr. Aronson
thus has to choose between ill-suited instruments and inventing her own. If she invents a
useful device, she creates an opportunity for further innovation by an established firm.

° Representation in social networks. Another way to increase the keenness of your sens-
ing is to ensure that you are plugged into the appropriate social networks. Social institutions
of all kinds facilitate communication among innovators. Some of these institutions may
not be related to professional life. Cricket and softball leagues in Silicon Valley are widely
known to be hotbeds of entrepreneurial activity and have played a key role in facilitating
the exchange of ideas leading to opportunities for new products. Online social networking
communities and discussion forums also may foster communication among innovators.

° Universities and government laboratories. Students, research staff, and professors
continually pursue novel solutions to vexing challenges. In many cases, the solutions
identified in universities and government laboratories can be commercialized by third
parties, including existing companies and start-ups. Research universities and government
laboratories have technology transfer organizations to facilitate this process.

° Online idea submission. Opportunities may be collected from customers and non-
customers through Web sites. For example, the computer company Dell runs a Web site
IdeaStorm for soliciting innovation opportunities from customers.46 Chapter 3

Step 3: Screen Opportunities

The goal of screening is simply to eliminate opportunities that are highly unlikely to result
in the creation of value and to focus attention on the opportunities worthy of further inves-
tigation. The aim is not to pick the single best opportunity. Given many opportunities to be
screened, the process must be relatively efficient, even at the expense of perfect accuracy.

For this step, a very effective screening criterion is the holistic judgment by a group of
individuals of whether or not the opportunity is worthy of a few days or weeks of addi-
tional investigation. Separate application of multiple screening criteria (e. g., market need,
technological feasibility, alignment with strategy) tends to bog down the process in un-
necessary discussion. Recall that in most settings you will have dozens or even hundreds
of raw opportunities to consider.

Two methods are effective approaches to screening: Web-based surveys and work-
shops with “multivoting.” Both methods rely on the independent judgments of a group
of people. Typically this group comprises members of your organization, but could be an
extended entrepreneurial team, or even friends and family members with relevant exper-
tise. Of course, the group performing the evaluation must have relevant expertise, even if
that expertise varies in type and depth.

A Web-based interface can ensure that the participants don’t know the author of each
idea, so they will base their votes on the quality of the opportunity, not their opinion of its
originator. Many free Web-based survey tools are available, or you can use one of the Web-
based tools designed specifically for the purpose of evaluating innovation opportunities. A
Web-based screening survey can be as simple as a listing of opportunities with short descrip-
tions for which you ask respondents simply to indicate a yes—no vote on whether or not the
opportunity deserves further investment. Alternatively, you can use a 1—10 scale, which may
be useful if you have a relatively small group of people voting. In our experience, you need
at least six independent judgments, and preferably more than 10, to make reliable decisions.

You can also use an in-person workshop to evaluate opportunities. In a format we have
used frequently, each participant presents one or more opportunities to the group. These
presentations can be supported by a single slide, page, or ﬂip-chart sheet. We strongly
recommend that these presentations be limited to about one minute and that each pre-
senter adhere to the same time limit and format. Summaries of each opportunity may be
distributed in advance of the workshop.

Following the presentations, you ask a group of raters to multivote on the opportuni-
ties. With multivoting, you display opportunities on pages or ﬂip-chart sheets posted on the
walls of the room where you’re conducting your workshop. Raters are given “dots” (or other
types of stickers) to register their votes. They simply apply their stickers to the opportunities
they favor. (Another way that multivoting may be applied in the product development pro-
cess is for choosing the most promising concepts. See Chapter 8, Concept Selection.)

We recommend that you number the opportunities and ask voters to write the number
of the opportunity they will vote for on each of their stickers. They do this quietly as a
group before actually applying the stickers to the sheets. Then, everyone places their
stickers simultaneously. By this method, you avoid inﬂuencing the voting decisions with
information about how others have voted.

Workshops work well for reviewing up to about 50 opportunities. For more than 50,
we suggest first doing a round of Web-based screening.Opportunity Identification 47

Regardless of which voting method you choose, we suggest that you consider advanc-
ing not only the ideas receiving the most votes, but also those with only a few very enthu-
siastic supporters. Strong opinions often point to exceptional ideas. Remember that your
goal is to efficiently eliminate opportunities that are not worthy of further investment, but
to avoid killing a potentially great idea.

The FroliCat team had developed 50 raw opportunities as the result of the efforts of
six individuals working independently and in brainstorming sessions. The team members
identified seven opportunities they felt were worthy of further development, by aggregat-
ing the individual judgments of the team members, including both product designers at
Asentio and marketing managers at FroliCat.

Step 4: Develop Promising Opportunities

Rarely does it make sense to bet on a single opportunity. Too much uncertainty clouds the
prospects for success. After screening opportunities, the team should invest modest levels
of resources in developing a few of them. At a minimum, an opportunity passing the ini-
tial screen warrants an Internet search for existing solutions and an informal discussion
with a few potential customers.

Some additional tasks that are often worth completing include: customer interviews,
testing of existing products, concept generation, quick prototypes, and estimates of mar-
ket sizes and growth rates. You might invest a few days to a few weeks in each of several
promising opportunities.

In developing promising opportunities, the goal is to resolve the greatest uncertainty
surrounding each one at the lowest cost in time and money. One way to structure this
step is to list the major uncertainties regarding the success of each opportunity, the tasks
you could take to resolve the uncertainties, and the approximate cost of each task. Then,
perform the tasks that resolve the most uncertainty at the lowest cost. For example, an
opportunity based on a clever concept might not be very valuable if a patent is unlikely.
A cursory patent search takes just a couple of hours, and so that is a task that should be
completed early in the process of developing the opportunity.

The FroliCat team explored the seven opportunities shown in Exhibit 3-5 and selected
three opportunities for further development. The subsequent development tasks were to
build functional prototypes and test them with cats and cat owners, to create packaging
concepts and test their appeal with consumers, and to complete financial analysis based
on likely manufacturing costs and price points.

Step 5: Select Exceptional Opportunities

Once a handful of opportunities have been developed with modest investment of re-
sources, enough uncertainty should be resolved in order to pick the exceptional few op-
portunities that warrant a significant investment in product development.

Chapter 8, Concept Selection, describes how to choose a design concept by compar-
ing alternatives against selection criteria. The same basic method can be used to select

product opportunities. One specific approach used within established companies is the
Real— Win- Worth-it (RWW) method, developed originally by 3M (Day, 2007). The name,48 Chapter 3

Real-Win-Worth-it, summarizes the three questions an organization should attempt to an-
swer when screening opportunities:

0 Is the opportunity real? Is there a real market that you can serve with the product?
Criteria here include market size, potential pricing, availability of technology, and the
likelihood the product can be delivered in the required volume at the required cost.

° Can you win with this opportunity? Can you establish a sustainable competitive ad-
vantage? Can you patent or brand the idea? Are you more capable of executing it than
competitors? For example, do you have superior engineering talent in this field?

0 Is the opportunity worth it financially? Do you have the resources needed (financial
and developmental) and are you confident that the investment will be rewarded with
appropriate returns?

Exhibit 3-10 shows the RWW criteria applied to the “swinging-ball” opportunity for
FroliCat. An analysis like this one, done for each opportunity, allows the team to nar-
row the opportunities to the exceptional few. For FroliCat, the swinging-ball concept was
highly appealing to potential purchasers, was engaging for cats, offered the prospect of a
good patent, and could be developed and launched with modest investment. These factors
distinguished the opportunity from the others.

Real-Win-Worth-it (RWW) Framework—"Swing Ball Cat Toy" Example

1. Is there a real market and a real product?

Is there a need? (What is the need? How is the need presently satisfied?) Yes
Can the customer buy? (size of the market, customer decision—making process) Yes
Will the customer buy? (perceived risks and benefits, expectations on price and availability) Yes
Is there a viable concept for a product already? How likely are we to be able to develop a viable concept? Yes
Is the product acceptable within the social, legal, and environmental norms? Yes
Is the product feasible? Can it be made? Is the technology available? Does it satisfy the needs? Yes
Will our product satisfy the market? Is there a relative advantage to other products? Yes
Can it be produced at low cost? Yes
Are the risks perceived by the customer acceptable? What are the barriers to adoption? E

Answer YES

2. Can we win? Can our product or service be competitive? Can we succeed as a company?
Do we have a competitive advantage? Is it sustainable? (performance, patents, barriers to entry,

substitution, price) Yes
Is the timing right? Yes
Does it fit our brand? Yes
Will we beat our competition? (How much will they improve? price trajectories, entrants) Yes
Do we have superior resources? (engineering, finance, marketing, production; fit with core competencies) No
Do we have the management that can win? (experience? fit with culture? commitment to this opportunity?) Yes
Do we know the market as well as or better than our competitors? (customer behavior? channels?) 3

Answer YES

3. Is it worth doing? Is the return adequate and the risk acceptable?

Will it make money? Yes
Do we have the resources and the cash to do this? Yes
Are the risks acceptable to us? (What could go wrong? technical risk vs. market risk) Yes
Does it fit our strategy? (fit with our growth expectation, impact on brand, embedded options) E

Answer YES

EXHIBIT 3-1 0 The Real-Win-Worth-it criteria applied to the swinging ball opportunity. The checklist is available
from the book Web site.Opportunity Identification 49

This same selection method can be applied using other criteria. An entrepreneur
starting a new business will use different criteria from those of an established company.
For example, in addition to or instead of the Real-Win-Worth-it criteria, an entrepreneur
might select opportunities based on the amount of capital required, the time required to
get to market, or the passion and excitement invoked by the opportunity.

Step 6: Reflect on the Results and the Process

The FroliCat team pursued the swing-ball opportunity and developed a product for
sale (Exhibit 3-11), which was named the Sway. The Sway was launched through
major retailers such as Amazon. The team anxiously awaited the market response,
which would be a key indicator of the success of their opportunity identification
process. However, market success is not the only success criterion for the process.
Some questions to consider in reﬂecting on the opportunity identification results and
process are:

0 How many of the opportunities identified came from internal sources versus external
sources?

° Did we consider dozens or hundreds of opportunities?
0 Was the innovation charter too narrowly focused?

° Were our filtering criteria biased, or largely based on the best possible estimates of
eventual product success?

0 Are the resulting opportunities exciting to the team?

 

EXHIBIT 3-1 1 The Sway cat-toy product that resulted from the swinging-ball opportunity.50 Chapter 3

 

Summary

This chapter articulates a conceptual framework for opportunity identification as a tour-
nament in which a large number of raw opportunities are generated and then filtered and
explored in order to narrow those opportunities to an exceptional few.

The opportunity identification process includes six steps:

Establish a charter.

Generate and sense many opportunities.
Screen opportunities.

Develop promising opportunities.
Select exceptional opportunities.

QP‘PP’NI‘

Reﬂect on the results and the process.

The performance of the opportunity identification process depends on considering a
large number of opportunities from a variety of sources, applying idea generation pro-
cesses that result in good opportunities, and in considering opportunities of widely vary-
ing quality. By systematically filtering and developing a large set of raw opportunities to
identify an exceptional few for further development, the resources of the organization are
put to their best use.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources, including the Real-Win-Worth-it spreadsheet, and Web-based
software for evaluating opportunities, are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

For more information about opportunity identification, see these books.
Kim, W. Chan, and Renee Mauborgne, Blue Ocean Strategy: How to Create
Uncontested Market Space and Make Competition Irrelevant, Harvard Business

Press, Boston, 2005.

Nalebuff, Barry, and Ian Ayres, Why Not? How to Use Everyday Ingenuity to Solve
Problems Big and Small, Harvard Business Press, Boston, 2003.

Terwiesch, Christian, and Karl T. Ulrich, Innovation Tournaments: Creating and
Identifying Exceptional Opportunities, Harvard Business Press, Boston, 2009.

VanGundy discusses the merits of various screening methods.
VanGundy, Arthur B., Techniques of Structured Problem Solving, second edition, Van
Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1988.

The Real-Win-Worth-it method is described in greater detail in this article by Day.
Day, George 8., “Is it Real? Can We Win? Is it Worth Doing?: Managing Risk and
Reward in an Innovation Portfolio,” Harvard Business Review, December 2007.

The following studies provide some of the theoretical and experimental evidence for the
principles underlying the opportunity identification process.

Girotra, Karan, Christian Terwiesch, and Karl Ulrich, “Idea Generation and the
Quality of the Best Idea,” Management Science, Vol. 56, No. 4, 2010, pp. 591—604.Exercises

Opportunity Identification 51

Kornish, Laura J., and Karl T. Ulrich, “Opportunity Spaces in Innovation: Empirical
Analysis of Large Samples of Ideas, Management Science, Vol. 57, No. 1, January
2011, pp. 107—128.”

1. Visit a local specialty retail store (e.g., sporting goods, cooking products, electronics)

and identify a generic product or commodity that might be “de-commoditized” and
differentiated through innovation.

2. Generate 10 opportunities for innovation based on an area of your own personal

passion.

3. Identify the VRIN resources for a product-based company you admire. What new

product opportunities might be enabled by these resources?

Thought Questions

1.

What are the advantages and disadvantages of anonymous voting in screening
opportunities?

. Would consumers make good raters in an opportunity screening process?
. Can you really answer the question of whether an opportunity is real (as in the Real-

Win-Worth-it criteria) before developing a product concept?

. Could a great opportunity identification process result in a product that fails in the

market?

. How do the risks differ between two types of Horizon 2 opportunities, one addressing

a current market need and the other using a current solution?CHAPTER FOUR

Product Planning

 

Courtesy of Xerox
EXHIBIT 4-1
The Lakes project developed a new copier platform, including this new product, the Xerox
Document Centre 265.

5354 Chapter 4

Xerox Corporation is a global enterprise offering a wide array of document-related
products, services, and business solutions. Its mission is to be the leader in the global
document market, providing document solutions that enhance business productivity. A
key element of Xerox’s competitive strategy is to exploit technological innovation in a
rapidly changing market. Pursuing this strategy requires the ability to choose the right set
of development projects and to define the scope of these projects in such a way that the
projects are complementary. Exhibit 4-1 is a photo of the Xerox Document Centre 265, a
product resulting from a Xerox project code-named Lakes.

The product planning process takes place before a product development project is
formally approved, before substantial resources are applied, and before the larger devel-
opment team is formed. Product planning is an activity that considers the portfolio of
projects that an organization might pursue and determines what subset of these projects
will be pursued over what time period. The product planning activity ensures that product
development projects support the broader business strategy of the company and addresses
these questions:

° What product development projects will be undertaken?

0 What mix of fundamentally new products, platforms, and derivative products should
be pursued?

° How do the various projects relate to each other as a portfolio?
0 What will be the timing and sequence of the projects?

Each of the selected projects is then completed by a product development team. The
team needs to know its mission before beginning development. The answers to these criti-
cal questions are included in a mission statement for the team:

° What market segments should be considered in designing the product and developing
its features?

0 What new technologies (if any) should be incorporated into the new product?
0 What are the manufacturing and service goals and constraints?

0 What are the financial targets for the project?

0 What are the budget and time frame for the project?

This chapter explains how an organization can maximize the effectiveness of its prod-
uct development efforts by first considering the set of potential projects it might pursue,
deciding which projects are most desirable, and then launching each project with a fo-
cused mission. We present a five-step planning process beginning with the identification
of opportunities and resulting in a mission statement for the project team.

The Product Planning Process

The product plan identifies the portfolio of products to be developed by the organization
and the timing of their introduction to the market. The planning process considers prod-
uct development opportunities identified by many sources, including suggestions from
marketing, research, customers, current product development teams, and benchmarking
of competitors. From among these opportunities, a portfolio of projects is chosen, timing ofNew
Platforms

Derivatives

Improvements

Fundamentally
New

Product Planning 55

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hodaka . . . Legend
Lakes . . . . ¢ Project
Product

L-Net Q 0 ¢

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

595 6010 9 392 ¢ 393 ¢

 

 

 

 

 

1996 I 1997 I 1998 I 1999 I 2000 I

EXHIBIT 4-2 The product plan identifies the portfolio of projects to be pursued by the development organization.
This plan divides projects into four categories: new platforms, derivatives of existing platforms, product improvements,
and fundamentally new products.

projects is outlined, and resources are allocated. Exhibit 4-2 is an example of a product
plan listing products to be developed and indicating the time frame for each.

The product plan is regularly updated to reﬂect changes in the competitive environ-
ment, changes in technology, and information on the success of existing products. Product
plans are developed with the company’s goals, capabilities, constraints, and competitive
environment in mind. Product planning decisions generally involve the senior manage-
ment of the organization and may take place only annually or a few times each year. Some
organizations have a director of planning who manages this process.

Organizations that do not carefully plan the portfolio of development projects to pur-
sue are often plagued with inefficiencies such as:

° Inadequate coverage of target markets with competitive products.
0 Poor timing of market introductions of products.

° Mismatches between aggregate development capacity and the number of projects
pursued.

° Poor distribution of resources, with some projects overstaffed and others understaffed.
° Initiation and subsequent cancellation of ill-conceived projects.
0 Frequent changes in the directions of projects.

Four Types of Product Development Projects
Product development projects can be classified as four types:

° New product platforms: This type of project involves a major development effort to
create a new family of products based on a new, common platform. The new product
family would address familiar markets and product categories. The Xerox Lakes proj-
ect, aimed at the development of a new, digital copier platform, is an example of this
type of project.56 Chapter 4

° Derivatives of existing product platforms: These projects extend an existing product
platform to better address familiar markets with one or more new products. To develop
a new copier based on an existing light-lens (not digital) product platform would be an
example of this type of project.

° Incremental improvements to existing products: These projects may only involve add-
ing or modifying some features of existing products in order to keep the product line
current and competitive. A slight change to remedy minor ﬂaws in an existing copier
product would be an example of this type of proj ect.

° Fundamentally new products: These projects involve radically different product or
production technologies and may help to address new and unfamiliar markets. Such
projects inherently involve more risk; however, the long-term success of the enterprise
may depend on what is learned through these important projects. The first digital
copier Xerox developed is an example of this type of project.

The Process

Exhibit 4-3 illustrates the steps in the product planning process. First, multiple opportuni-
ties are prioritized and a set of promising projects is selected. Resources are allocated to
these projects and they are scheduled. These planning activities focus on a portfolio of
opportunities and potential projects and are sometimes referred to as portfolio manage-
ment, aggregate product planning, product line planning, or product management. Once
projects have been selected and resources allocated, a mission statement is developed for
each project. The formulation of a product plan and the development of a mission state-
ment therefore precede the actual product development process.

Although we show the planning process as essentially linear, the activities of
selecting promising projects and allocating resources are inherently iterative. The
realities of schedules and budgets often force a reassessment of priorities and further
refinement and culling of potential projects. The product plan is therefore reevaluated
frequently and should be modified based on the latest information from develop-
ment teams, research laboratories, production, marketing, and service organizations.
People involved later in the process are often the first to realize that something
about the overall plan or a project’s mission is inconsistent, infeasible, or out of date.
The ability to adjust the product plan over time is vital to the long-term success of the
enterprise.

 
   
 
      
      

Multiple Projects

Evaluate and ______ Allocate Complete Product
Prioritize Resou rces and Pre-Project

Projects Portfolioof PlanTiming Product Planning Mission'
Projects Plan Statements

 

   

Identify
Opportunities

 

 

Development
Process

   
  
   

      

  
   

   
    

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 4-3 The product planning process. These activities address a portfolio of product development projects,
resulting in a product plan and, for each selected project, a mission statement.Product Planning 57

To develop a product plan and project mission statements, we suggest a five-step process:

Identify opportunities.

Evaluate and prioritize projects.
Allocate resources and plan timing.
Complete pre-project planning.

9:59P)?

Reﬂect on the results and the process.

Step 1: Identify Opportunities

The planning process begins with the identification of product development opportu-
nities. Such opportunities may involve any of the four types of projects defined above.
This step can be thought of as the opportunity funnel because it brings together inputs
from across the enterprise. Opportunities may be collected passively, but we also
recommend that the firm explicitly attempt to generate opportunities. Chapter 3, Op-
portunity Identification, provides a process for generating, recognizing, and evaluating
opportunities.

When employed actively, the opportunity funnel collects ideas continuously, and
new product opportunities may arise at any time. As a way of tracking, sorting, and
refining these opportunities, we recommend that each promising opportunity be de-
scribed in a short, coherent statement and that this information be collected in a da-
tabase. Several Web-based idea management systems are available for gathering and
storing information on opportunities, although a simple list in a spreadsheet may be
sufficient.

At Xerox, many opportunities had been gathered and discussed. Some were simple en-
hancements to existing products, and others were proposals for products based on entirely
new technologies. Following are some examples of opportunity statements similar to
those proposed at Xerox:

° Create a document distribution system in which a networked printing device resides on
each office worker’s desk and automatically delivers mail and other documents.

° Create document delivery software that allows the digital delivery and storage of most
intraorganizational documents via a worker’s personal computer.

This opportunity statement eventually became the Lakes project:

° Develop a new black and white (B&W), digital, networkable, document center plat-
form for the office market, including scanning, storage, fax, distribution, and printing
capabilities.

Step 2: Evaluate and Prioritize Projects

If managed actively, the opportunity funnel can collect hundreds or even thousands
of opportunities during a year. Some of these opportunities do not make sense in the
context of the firm’s other activities, and in most cases, there are simply too many
opportunities for the firm to pursue at once. The second step in the product planning58 Chapter 4

process is therefore to select the most promising projects to pursue. Four basic
perspectives are useful in evaluating and prioritizing opportunities for new products in
existing product categories: competitive strategy, market segmentation, technological
trajectories, and product platforms. After discussing these four perspectives, we then
discuss evaluating opportunities for fundamentally new products, and how to balance
the portfolio of projects.

Competitive Strategy

An organization’s competitive strategy defines a basic approach to markets and products
with respect to competitors. The choice of which opportunities to pursue can be guided
by this strategy. Most firms devote much discussion at senior management levels to their
strategic competencies and the ways in which they aim to compete. Several strategies are
possible, such as:

° Technology leadership: To implement this strategy, the firm places great emphasis on
basic research and development of new technologies and on the deployment of these
technologies through product development.

° Cost leadership: This strategy requires the firm to compete on production efficiency,
either through economies of scale, use of superior manufacturing methods, low-cost
labor, or better management of the production system. Design for manufacturing
methods (see Chapter 11) are therefore emphasized in the product (and process) devel-
opment activities under this strategy.

° Customer focus: To follow this strategy, the firm works closely with new and existing
customers to assess their changing needs and preferences. Carefully designed product
platforms facilitate the rapid development of derivative products with new features
or functions of interest to customers. This strategy may result in a broad product line
featuring high product variety in order to address the needs of heterogeneous customer
segments.

° Imitative: This strategy involves closely following trends in the market, allowing com-
petitors to explore which new products are successful for each segment. When viable
opportunities have been identified, the firm quickly launches new products to imitate
the successful competitors. A fast development process is essential to effectively im-
plement this strategy.

At Xerox, strategic discussions centered around how the company would participate in
the digital revolution of the office associated with growth of the Internet. Xerox believed
that the Internet would enable a paradigm shift in business practices from one of “print
and then distribute” to one of “distribute and then print.” The Lakes project would need to
support this corporate vision.

Market Segmentation

Customers can be usefully thought of as belonging to distinct market segments.
Dividing a market into segments allows the firm to consider the actions of com-
petitors and the strength of the firm’s existing products with respect to each well-
defined group of customers. By mapping competitors’ products and the firm’s ownDepartment

Workgroup

Market Segments

Personal

Product Planning 59

 

Lakes

Project i i
40 ppm r" Extensions i
$16k 1| a

25 ppm FEE Erin—q“. I’ZBBBK“
$10k '\\ $15k ,' '\\ $20k ,I Legend
__________ Xerox
, .................................................... ~ product
30 ppm 4° ppm .
product

’___ _._T\
/ potential \

20 ppm 25 ppm 30 ppm ‘99”3 Eef'f‘ir/I
5' $8k $9k $10k ‘3

 

 

 

1997 I 1998 I 1999 I 2000 I
Year of Release

EXHIBIT 4-4 Product segment map showing Xerox B&W digital products and the competition in three
market segments: personal, workgroup, and department machines. Key performance dimensions (pages per minute,
networking capability) and price points are listed for each product in the map, along with the time of its market

introduction.

products onto segments, the firm can assess which product opportunities best address
weaknesses in its own product line and which exploit weaknesses in the offerings of
competitors. Exhibit 4-4 shows a product segment map of this type for some Xerox
products in which markets are segmented according to the number of users sharing
office equipment.

Technological Trajectories

In technology-intensive businesses, a key product planning decision is when to adopt a
new basic technology in a product line. For example, in the document business, the key
technological issue at the turn of the century was the shift to digital image processing and
printing. The product planning decision was when to develop digital products, as opposed
to developing another product based on light-lens technology. Technology S—curves are a
conceptual tool to help think about such decisions.

The technology S-curve displays the performance of the products in a product cat-
egory over time, usually with respect to a single performance variable such as resolution,
speed, or reliability. The S-curve illustrates a basic but important concept: Technologies
evolve from initial emergence when performance is relatively low, through rapid growth
in performance based on experience, and finally approach maturity where some natural60 Chapter 4

Copier Product Performance

A

 

     
    
 
 
 

Digital
Technology

Light-Lens
Technology

' >

 

I
Today Time

EXHIBIT 4-5 This technology S-curve illustrates that Xerox believed digital copier technologies were just emerging
and would improve product performance in the coming years. Xerox believed that it could develop a full-featured digital
copier in the near future with performance exceeding that of light-lens copiers.

technological limit is reached and the technology may become obsolete. The S-shaped
trajectory captures this general dynamic, as shown in Exhibit 4-5. The horizontal axis
may be cumulative research and development effort or time; the vertical axis may be a
performance/cost ratio or any important performance dimension. While S-curves char-
acterize technological change remarkably well in a wide variety of industries, it is often
difficult to predict the future trajectory of the performance curve (how near or far is the
ultimate performance limit).

Product Platform Planning

The product platform is the set of assets shared across a set of products. Components
and subassemblies are often the most important of these assets. An effective platform
can allow a variety of derivative products to be created more rapidly and easily, with each
product providing the features and functions desired by a particular market segment. See
Chapter 10, Product Architecture, for more discussion of the underlying architecture en-
abling the product platform and for a platform planning method.

Since platform development projects can take from 2 to 10 times as much time and
money as derivative product development projects, a firm cannot afford to make every
project a new platform. Exhibit 4-6 illustrates the leverage of an effective product plat-
form. The critical strategic decision at this stage is whether a project will develop a de-
rivative product from an existing platform or develop an entirely new platform. DecisionsResearch and
Technology
Development

Platform
Product
Development

Derivative
Product
Development

Product Planning 61

 

 

 

 

V v Legend

Platform A Platform B Project

 

 

 

 

 

 

Product
Release .

 

 

 

>

 

Time

EXHIBIT 4-6 A platform development project creates the architecture of a family of products. Derivative products
may be included in the initial platform development effort (Platform A) or derivative products may follow thereafter

(Platform B).

about product platforms are very closely related to the technology development efforts of
the firm and to decisions about which technologies to employ in new products.

One technique for coordinating technology development with product planning is the
technology roadmap. A technology roadmap is a way to represent the expected avail-
ability and future use of various technologies relevant to the product being considered.
This method has been used by Motorola, Philips, Xerox, and other leaders in fast-moving
high-technology industries. The method is particularly useful for planning products in
which the critical functional elements are well known in advance.

To create a technology roadmap, multiple generations of technologies are labeled and
arranged along a time line, as shown in Exhibit 4-7. The technology roadmap can be aug-
mented with the timing of projects and projects that would utilize these technological de-
velopments. (This is sometimes then called a product-technology roadmap.) The result is
a diagram showing a product’s key functional elements and the sequence of technologies
expected to implement these elements over a given period of time. Technology roadmap-
ping can serve as a planning tool to create a joint strategy between technology develop-
ment and product development.

Evaluating Fundamentally New Product Opportunities

In addition to new versions of products in existing product categories, the firm faces
many opportunities in either new markets or fundamentally new technologies. While
investing scarce resources in the development of products using new technologies or
for new markets is quite risky, some such investments are necessary to periodically62

Chapter 4

Functional Elements

Technologies

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

/ \
Photo- Cylindrical 3-Pitch Belt n-Pitch Belt
receptor Drum Photoreceptor Photoreceptor
\ j
K _ _ \
Scanner 2D CCD Array Full-Width, Linear Array
Layout \w/Optical Reduc. without Optical Reduction /
f \
Toner High Low Melting Low Melting Point,
Ty e Tem erature Point Low Emission
p K p j
K \
Output Monochrome: Paper, Fax, Scan, Color: Paper, Fax, Scan,
Modes \ Local Network, Internet Local Network, Internet /
User / \
Interface Keypad Touch Screen Touch Screen, Remote PC
\ J
Image / Automatic Image Quality \
Processing \ 600 dpl 600/1200 dpi 1200 dpi 1800 dpi /
D' . / On-Board Remote-Dialup Remote \
Iagnostlcs Diagnostics Diagnostics Repair
\ /
Centre Centre Centre Centre
220, 230 240, 255, 265 2XX 3XX
Hodaka Lakes Lakes Next
Project Project Extensions Platform
>
Time

EXHIBIT 4-7 This technology roadmap shows the life cycles of several digital photocopying technologies and
identifies which technologies would be used in each product. For the Lakes platform, Xerox selected technologies
for critical functions that could be extended to the higher speeds and color capability required of its derivative

products.

rejuvenate the product portfolio (Christensen, 1997). Some criteria for evaluating fun-
damentally new product opportunities include:

0 Market size (units/year >< average price).

Market growth rate (percent per year).

Competitive intensity (number of competitors and their strengths).
Depth of the firm’s existing knowledge of the market.

Depth of the firm’s existing knowledge of the technology.

Fit with the firm’s other products.

Fit with the firm’s capabilities.Research and

Product Planning 63

0 Potential for patents, trade secrets, or other barriers to competition.
° Existence of a product champion within the firm.

While these criteria are particularly useful in evaluating fundamentally new product
opportunities, they also apply generally to evaluating any product opportunity. These criteria
can be used in a simple screening matrix to evaluate the overall attractiveness and types of
risk for any given opportunity. Chapter 3, Opportunity Identification, includes the Real-Win-
Worth-it analysis for opportunities, an example of criteria-based evaluation. Chapter 8, Con-
cept Selection, describes screening matrices for selecting product concepts, but this method
is directly applicable to selecting product opportunities as well.

Balancing the Portfolio

There are many methods to help managers manage an organization’s portfolio of develop-
ment projects. Several of these methods involve mapping the portfolio along useful dimen-
sions so that managers may consider the strategic implications of their planning decisions.
Cooper et al. (2001) describe nLunerous mapping approaches involving dimensions such as
technical risk, financial return, market attractiveness, and the like. One particularly useful
mapping, suggested by Wheelwright and Clark (1992), plots the portfolio of projects along
two specific dimensions: the extent to which the project involves a change in the product line
and the extent to which the project involves a change in production processes. Exhibit 4-8

Extent of Production Process Changes

 

Technology : New Next Single Tuning and No
Development 0 Core Generation Department Incremental Process
Process Process Upgrade Changes Change
New Breakthrough
Core . . Development
Product Projects
Platform
Next
"’ Generation Degelopment
d.) - t
2’ Product rajec s
g Lakes
5 Addition ”meet
«3 o o oo o o
0': Family Derivative
"6 Product
2:: Minor Development
3? Product . . . . .
l-U Enhancement
No Current
Product . Product/Process
Change Support

 

 

 

Adapted from Wheelright and Clark, 1992

EXHIBIT 4-8 Product-process change matrix. The size of the circles indicates the relative cost of the development

projects.64 Chapter 4

illustrates this mapping, called a product-process change matrix. This perspective can be use-
ful to illuminate imbalances in the portfolio of projects under consideration and in assessing
the consistency between a portfolio of projects and the competitive strategy. For example, a
firm may discover that it has identified essentially no breakthrough opportunities or that it
has no projects aimed at incremental improvements to existing products.

There are no general procedures for deciding exactly what the portfolio should look
like. However, the firm’s choice of competitive strategy should affect the shape of the
product development portfolio. For example, a firm pursuing a low-cost strategy would
expect the portfolio to contain more production process improvement projects. Firms fol-
lowing a strategy requiring high product variety would need to develop many derivative
products based upon existing platforms. Firms implementing a strategy based on technolog-
ical superiority may need to have a portfolio including more technology development and
breakthrough projects in anticipation that not all of these risky projects will result in mar-
ketable new products. Note that planning research and technology development activities is
closely coupled to, but generally outside the purview of, the product planning process.

Step 3: Allocate Resources and Plan Timing

It is likely that the firm cannot afford to invest in every product development opportunity in
its desired balanced portfolio of proj ects. As timing and resource allocation are determined for
the most promising projects, too many projects will invariably compete for too few resources.
As a result, the attempt to assign resources and plan timing ahnost always results in a return to
the prior evaluation and prioritization step to prune the set of proj ects to be pursued.

Resource Allocation

Many organizations take on too many projects without regard for the limited availabil-
ity of development resources. As a result, skilled engineers and managers are assigned
to more and more projects, productivity drops off dramatically, projects take longer to
complete, products become late to the market, and profits are lower. Aggregate planning
helps an organization make efficient use of its resources by pursuing only those projects
that can reasonably be completed with the budgeted resources.

The Lakes project was only one of many projects proposed at Xerox. However, since
Lakes involved the development of an entirely new platform, this project was substantially
larger than the other projects being considered at the time. Any feasible portfolio of projects
would be dominated by the resource demands of the Lakes platform development effort. In
fact, for the managers at Xerox to find the resources necessary to execute Lakes, many other
projects had to be eliminated or postponed until engineers were finished working on Lakes.

Estimating the resources required for each of the projects in the plan by month, quarter,
or year forces the organization to face the realities of finite resources. In most cases, the
primary resource to be managed is the effort of the development staff, usually expressed
in person-hours or person-months. Other critical resources may also require careful
planning, such as model shop facilities, rapid prototyping equipment, pilot production
lines, testing facilities, and so on. Estimates of required resources in each period can
be compared with available resources to compute an overall capacity utilization ratio
(demand/capacity) as well as utilizations by resource types, as shown in Exhibit 4-9.
Where utilization exceeds 100 percent, there are not sufficient resources to execute all ofYear 1 Year 2 Year 3
5') 5') 5')
C C C
_ 5') 'C 5') _ 5') 'C 5') _ 5') 'C 5')
3 .5 a5 \a, _ 3 .5 a5 \a, _ 3 .5 35 B09—
,_ — L L h ,_ — L L (D h ,_ — L L h
g: .gggg 5‘“ 'EC 5:53 E8 (5‘5 'EC 5: £8 £8 (Em-E:
55° :5 =5 23 35° 55° :5 =5 23 35° 55° :5 =5 23 35°
83 8353235 83 83 83° 3335 83 83 83° 53° 23583
ED Em Em (OLE ED 20 Em Em (OLE ED 20 Em Em (OLE ED
Lakes Project 155 160 105 75 7 210 160 140 80 4 125 140 160 90 2
6010 Project 30 25 10 5 1 25 20 5 6 5
595 Project 60 24 25 20 15 15
Astro Project 55 60 44 25 2 75 65 50 40 2 45 40 60 20
Resource Demand 300 269 184 105 10 330 260 210 126 6 170 180 225 110 2
Resource Capacity 250 250 200 100 8 250 250 200 100 8 250 250 200 100 8
Capacity Utilization 120% 108% 92% 105% 125% 132% 104% 105% 126% 75% 68% 72% 113% 110% 25%
140%
120%
g 100% —
'2 2 2 2
5 2’ .5 2° .5 2° .5
.2 60% 2, '8 2 2 2, '8 2 2 2, '8 2 2
8 '3 ”c’ "'3, 5 5° '3 ”c’ "'3, 5 5° '3 ”c’ "'3, 5 5°
9- '_ E a) '5') c E U) Q '5') c E 0)
cu 0 D 2’ .E h a: D c 'c h a: c 'c h a.)
° 40" 8 ”J 3 LE 9 8 ”J 3 LE 9 8 ”J 3 LE 9
'_ _ o 0’ ‘5 '- _ o (D (U ._ — o (D m
a 5 .§ .5; a '5 5 .§ .5; a '5 5 .§ .5; a '5
20A) '5 '5 c E '5' '5 '5 c E '5' '5 '5 c E '5'
a: 2 (U o '0 a: 2 (U o '0 a: 2 (U o '0
/ 2 Lu 2 U) E 2 Lu 2 U) E 2 Lu 2 U) E
0%

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3

EXHIBIT 4-9 Aggregate resource planning can be achieved using a simple spreadsheet method based on estimates of resource
demands over time. This example spreadsheet uses units of person-years, although smaller time units (quarters or months) are
commonly used in practice. The associated chart highlights Where capacity is insufficient to handle all of the projects.

99 Suruunld 19712004466 Chapter 4

the projects in the plan on schedule. In fact, to allow for contingencies and to enable re-
sponsiveness, planned capacity utilization may be below 100 percent.

In the aggregate planning process, an organization may find that it is in danger of over-
committing resources (often by as much as 100 percent or more, according to Wheelwright
and Clark, 1992). Therefore the organization must decide in the planning stage which
projects are most important to the success of the firm, and pursue those with adequate re-
sources. Other projects may need to be eliminated from the plan or shifted in time.

Project Timing
Determining the timing and sequence of projects, sometimes called pipeline management,
must consider a number of factors, including:

° Timing of product introductions: Generally the sooner a product is brought to market
the better. However, launching a product before it is of adequate quality can damage
the reputation of the firm.

° Technology readiness: The robustness of the underlying technologies plays a critical
role in the planning process. A proven, robust technology can be integrated into prod-
ucts much more quickly and reliably.

° Market readiness: The sequence of product introductions determines whether early
adopters buy the low-end product and may trade up or whether they buy the high-end
product offered at a high initial price. Releasing improvements too quickly can frus-
trate customers who want to keep up; on the other hand, releasing new products too
slowly risks lagging behind competitors.

° Competition: The anticipated release of competing products may accelerate the timing
of development projects.

The Product Plan

The set of projects approved by the planning process, sequenced in time, becomes the
product plan, as shown earlier in Exhibit 4-2. The plan may include a mix of fundamen-
tally new products, platform projects, and derivative projects of varying size. Product
plans are updated on a periodic basis, perhaps quarterly or annually, as part of the firm’s
strategic planning activity.

Step 4: Complete Pre-Projeot Planning

Once the project has been approved, but before substantial resources are applied, a pre-project
planning activity takes place. This activity involves a small, cross-functional team of people,
often known as the core team. The Lakes core team consisted of approximately 30 people rep-
resenting a wide range of technical expertise, marketing, manufacturing, and service functions.
At this point, the earlier opportunity statement may be rewritten as a product vision
statement. The Lakes concept team began with the following product vision statement:

Develop a networked, mid-range, digital platform for imaging, marking, and ﬁnishing.

The objective defined by a product vision statement may be very general. It may not
say which specific new technologies should be used, nor does it necessarily specify the
goals and constraints of functions such as production and service operations. In orderEXHIBIT 4-1 0
Mission
statement for the
Lakes project.
This document
summarizes

the direction

to be followed
by the product
development
team. Many
more details

are appended

to this mission
statement,
including the
environmental
goals, service
objectives,

and specific
technologies
identified for
use in the Lakes
platform.

Product Planning 67

 

Mission Statement: Multifunctional Office Document Machine

 

Product Description

Networkable, digital machine with copy, print, fax, and
scan functions

 

Benefit Proposition

Multiple document processing functions in one
machine
Connected to office computer network

 

Key Business Goals

Support Xerox strategy of leadership in digital office
equipment

Serve as platform for all future B&W digital products
and solutions

Capture 50% ofdigital product sales in primary market
Environmentally friendly

First product introduction 4th Q 1997

 

Primary Market

Office departments, mid—volume (40—65 ppm,
above 42,000 avg. copies/mo.)

 

Secondary Markets

Quick-print market
Small "satellite” operations

 

Assumptions and Constraints

New product platform

Digital imaging technology

Compatible with CentreWare software

Input devices manufactured in Canada

Output devices manufactured in Brazil

Image processing engine manufactured in both the
United States and Europe

 

Stakeholders

Purchasers and users
Manufacturing operations
Service operations
Distributors and resellers

 

to provide clear guidance for the product development organization, generally the team
formulates a more detailed definition of the target market and of the assumptions under
which the development team will operate. These decisions are captured in a mission state-
ment, a summary of which is illustrated in Exhibit 4-10.

Mission Statements

The mission statement may include some or all of the following information:

° Brief (one-sentence) description of the product: This description identifies the basic
function of the product but avoids implying a specific product concept. It may, in fact,

be the product vision statement.

° Beneﬁt proposition: This element of the mission statement articulates the critical few
reasons a customer would buy the product. To some extent this is a hypothesis, which
will be validated during the concept development process.

° Key business goals: In addition to the project goals that support the corporate strategy,
these goals generally include goals for time, cost, and quality (e.g., timing of the product
introduction, desired financial performance, market share targets).68 Chapter 4

° Target market(s) for the product: There may be several target markets for the product.
This part of the mission statement identifies the primary market as well as any second-
ary markets that should be considered in the development effort.

° Assumptions and constraints that guide the development effort: Assumptions must be
made carefully; although they restrict the range of possible product concepts, they help
to maintain a manageable project scope. Information may be attached to the mission
statement to document decisions about assumptions and constraints.

° Stakeholders: One way to ensure that many of the subtle development issues are ad-
dressed is to explicitly list all of the product’s stakeholders, that is, all of the groups
of people who are affected by the product’s success or failure. The stakeholder list be-
gins with the end user (the ultimate external customer) and the external customer who
makes the buying decision about the product. Stakeholders also include the customers
of the product who reside within the firm, such as the sales force, the service organi-
zation, and the production departments. The list of stakeholders serves as a reminder
for the team to consider the needs of everyone who will be inﬂuenced by the product.

Assumptions and Constraints

In creating the mission statement, the team considers the strategies of several functional
areas within the firm. Of the many possible functional strategies to consider, the manu-
facturing, service, and environmental strategies had the largest inﬂuence on the Lakes
project. In fact, these strategies guided the core technical developments of the product.

One could reasonably ask why manufacturing, service, and environmental strategies
(for example) should be part of the mission statement for a new product. An alternative
view is that decisions about these issues should arise from the customer needs for the new
product and should not be determined in advance. First, for extremely complex projects,
like Lakes, the design of the manufacturing system is a project of similar magnitude to
the design of the product itself. As a result, the manufacturing facilities involved in the
product need to be identified very early in the process. Second, some product require-
ments may not be derived strictly from customer needs. For example, most customers will
not directly express a need for low environmental impact. However, Xerox chose to adopt
a corporate policy of environmentally responsible design. In such cases, the mission state-
ment should reﬂect such corporate objectives and constraints.

Following are some of the issues that Xerox considered in establishing assumptions
and constraints for the Lakes project.

° Manufacturing: Even at this very preliminary stage, it is important to consider the
capabilities, capacities, and constraints of the manufacturing operations. A broad
array of questions may be relevant, including: Which internal production facilities
might be used to manufacture and assemble the product? What key suppliers should
be involved in the development, and when? Are the existing production systems ca-
pable of producing the new technologies that have been identified for the product?
For Lakes, Xerox assumed that input devices would be manufactured at production
sites in Canada, output devices in Brazil, and the digital image processing engine in
both the United States and Europe.

° Service: In a business where customer service and service revenue are critical to the
success of the firm, it is necessary to also state strategic goals for levels of serviceProduct Planning 69

quality. Efforts to improve service include a strategic commitment to designing prod-
ucts that contain few parts, which can be serviced quickly. For Lakes, serviceability
goals included reducing both the number of field-replaceable modules required to
fully service the machine and the time to install them by an order of magnitude.

° Environment: Many corporations today are developing new products with environmen-
tal sustainability in mind. The Lakes concept team adopted Xerox’s first “zero to land-
fill” policy, an aggressive goal even for a leader in environmental design practices such
as Xerox. The stated goal was that no components from a Lakes product should ever go
to a landfill. All components would be either remanufacturable or recyclable, or both.
No parts should be disposed of by customers. The Lakes environmental design strategy
also included an energy efficiency goal to be the “most efficient machine in its class.”

Staffing and Other Pre-Project Planning Activities

The pre-project planning activity also generally addresses project staffing and leadership.
This may involve getting key members of the development staff to “sign up” for a new
project, that is, to agree to commit to leading the development of the product or of a critical
element of the product. Budgets are also generally established during pre-project planning.

For fundamentally new products, budgets and staffing plans will be for the concept de-
velopment phase of development only. This is because the details of the project are highly
uncertain until the basic concept for the new product has been established. More detailed
planning will occur when and if the concept is developed further.

Step 5: Reflect on the Results and the Process

In this final step of the planning and strategy process, the team should ask several questions
to assess the quality of both the process and the results. Some suggested questions are:

0 Is the opportunity funnel collecting an exciting and diverse set of product opportunities?
° Does the product plan support the competitive strategy of the firm?
° Does the product plan address the most important current opportunities facing the firm?

° Are the total resources allocated to product development sufficient to pursue the firm’s
competitive strategy?

° Have creative ways of leveraging finite resources been considered, such as the use of
product platforms, joint ventures, and partnerships with suppliers?

° Does the core team accept the challenges of the resulting mission statement?
0 Are the elements of the mission statement consistent?

0 Are the assumptions listed in the mission statement really necessary or is the project
overconstrained? Will the development team have the freedom to develop the best pos-
sible product?

0 How can the product planning process be improved?

Because the mission statement is the handoff to the development team, a “reality
check” must be performed before proceeding with the development process. This early
stage is the time to remedy known ﬂaws, lest they become more severe and expensive as
the development process progresses.70 Chapter 4

This chapter explains the product planning method as a stepwise process, largely for

simplicity of the presentation. However, reﬂection and criticism of consistency and fit
should be an ongoing process. Steps in the process can and should be executed simultane-
ously to make sure that the many plans and decisions are consistent with one another and
with the goals, capabilities, and constraints of the firm.

 

Summary

Product planning is a periodic process that considers the portfolio of product develop-
ment projects to be executed.

Product planning involves a five-step process:

1. Identify opportunities.

2. Evaluate and prioritize projects.

3. Allocate resources and plan timing.

4. Complete pre-proj ect planning.

5. Reﬂect on the results and the process.

The opportunity funnel collects possibilities for new product platforms, enhancements,
and fundamentally new products from several sources within and outside the firm.

Potential product development projects are evaluated based on the organization’s com-
petitive strategy, technological trajectories, and product platform plans.

A balanced portfolio of development projects may include investments in breakthrough
products, new platforms, derivatives, and current product support.

Aggregate planning ensures that selected projects have adequate resources for success-
ful completion.

A mission statement for each product development project documents the product
description, benefit proposition, business goals, target markets, critical assumptions, and
the product’s stakeholders.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

There are many excellent books on competitive strategy. These selections include
discussions related to product planning.
Day, George 8., Market Driven Strategy: Processes for Creating Value, The Free
Press, New York, 1990.

Moore, Geoffrey A., Crossing the Chasm: Marketing and Selling Technology
Products to Mainstream Customers, Harper Business, New York, 1991.

Porter, Michael E., Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior
Performance, The Free Press, New York, 1985.

Treacy, Michael, and Fred Wiersema, The Discipline of Market Leaders, Addison-
Wesley, Reading, MA, 1995.Product Planning 71

Wheelwright and Clark discuss several of the dimensions of product planning presented
here, including aggregate planning and some mapping methods.
Wheelwright, Steven C., and Kim B. Clark, “Creating Plans to Focus Product
Development,” Harvard Business Review, March—April 1992, pp. 70—82.

Cooper, Edgett, and Kleinschmidt describe a wide range of product portfolio management

methods, including financial analysis, scoring techniques, and visual mapping methods.
Cooper, Robert G., Scott J. Edgett, and Elko J. Kleinschmidt, Portfolio Management
for New Products, second edition, Basic Books, New York, 2001.

Fine relates product planning and competitive strategy to the decisions of supply-chain
design and strategic partnerships with suppliers.
Fine, Charles H., Clockspeed: Winning Control in the Age of Temporary Advantage,
Perseus Books, Reading, MA, 1998.

McGrath emphasizes planning of product platforms and strategy for technology-based
products.
McGrath, Michael E., Product Strategy for High-Technology Companies, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1995.

Reinertsen focuses particular attention on the issue of excess utilization of aggregate
development capacity.
Reinertsen, Donald G., Managing the Design Factory: The Product Developer s
Toolkit, The Free Press, New York, 1997.

Marketing texts include a more detailed treatment of market strategy, market analysis, and
product planning.
Crawford, C. Merle, and Anthony Di Benedetto, New Products Management, ninth
edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2008.

Urban, Glen L., and John R. Hauser, Design and Marketing of New Products, second
edition, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1993.

Foster developed the S-curve concept and provides many interesting examples from a
diverse set of industries.
Foster, Richard N., Innovation: T heAttackersAdvantage, Summit Books, New York, 1986.

Burgelman and Maidique provide a very good discussion of technology S-curves and
stress that these life-cycle curves are not predetermined; rather, they can be inﬂuenced by
technical development efforts.
Burgelman, Robert A., Modesto A. Maidique, and Steven C. Wheelwright, Strategic
Management of Technology and Innovation, third edition, Irwin Professional Publishing,
Homewood, IL, 2001.

Several authors present a more thorough discussion of product platform planning in
various industries.
Meyer, Marc H., and Alvin P Lehnerd, The Power of Product Platforms, The Free
Press, New York, 1997.

Sanderson, Susan W., and Mustafa Uzumeri, Managing Product Families, Irwin,
Chicago, 1997.72 Chapter 4

Managers at Motorola and Philips describe their use of several technology roadmapping
methods for integrating the planning of technology development and product development.
Groenveld, Pieter, “Roadmapping Integrates Business and Technology,” Research-

Technology Management, Vol. 40, No. 5, Sep./Oct. 1997, pp. 48—55.

Willyard, Charles H., and Cheryl W. McClees, “Motorola’s Technology Roadmap
Process,” Research Management, Vol. 30, No. 5, Sep./Oct. 1987, pp. 13—19.

Christensen provides evidence that firms must invest in fundamentally new products,

technologies, and markets in order to remain at the leading edge of their industries.
Christensen, Clayton M., The Innovator s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause
Great Firms to Fail, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 1997.

Exercises

1. Conduct a search using the Internet or published corporate annual reports to identify the
corporate strategy of a company in which you might be interested in investing. Learn
about the firm’s product lines and its newest products. How do these products support the
corporate strategy? What types of proj ects would you expect to see in the product plan?

2. Create a product-technology roadmap illustrating the availability of technologies for a
class of products you understand well, such as personal computers.
Thought Questions

1. How might a portfolio of development projects differ if the firm believes a particular prod-
uct technology is currently at position A or B on the technology S-curve shown below?

A

Technical
Performance

 

 

O >

Time

 

2. How might Xerox be able to address the shortage of mechanical design engineers iden-
tified by the aggregate project planning analysis shown in Exhibit 4-9? List five ways
Xerox could increase the capacity and five ways to reduce the demand for mechanical
design engineers.CHAPTER FIVE

Identifying Customer
Needs

 

Photo by Stuart Cohen

EXHIBIT 5-1

Existing products used to drive screws: manual screwdrivers, cordless screwdriver, screw gun,
cordless drill with driver bit.

7374 Chapter 5

Mission
Statement

    
       
   

Identify
Customer
Needs

A successful hand tool manufacturer was exploring the growing market for handheld
power tools. After performing initial research, the firm decided to enter the market with
a cordless screwdriver. Exhibit 5-1 shows several existing products used to drive screws.
After some initial concept work, the manufacturer’s development team fabricated and
field-tested several prototypes. The results were discouraging. Although some of the
products were liked better than others, each one had some feature that customers objected
to in one way or another. The results were quite mystifying since the company had been
successful in related consumer products for years. After much discussion, the team de-
cided that its process for identifying customer needs was inadequate.

This chapter presents a method for comprehensively identifying a set of customer
needs. The goals of the method are to:

0 Ensure that the product is focused on customer needs.

0 Identify latent or hidden needs as well as explicit needs.

° Provide a fact base for justifying the product specifications.

0 Create an archival record of the needs activity of the development process.
0 Ensure that no critical customer need is missed or forgotten.

° Develop a common understanding of customer needs among members of the develop-
ment team.

The philosophy behind the method is to create a high-quality information channel that
runs directly between customers in the target market and the developers of the product.
This philosophy is built on the premise that those who directly control the details of the
product, including the engineers and industrial designers, must interact with customers
and experience the use environment of the product. Without this direct experience, techni-
cal trade-offs are not likely to be made correctly, innovative solutions to customer needs
may never be discovered, and the development team may never develop a deep commit-
ment to meeting customer needs.

The process of identifying customer needs is an integral part of the larger product de-
velopment process and is most closely related to concept generation, concept selection,
competitive benchmarking, and the establishment of product specifications. The customer-
needs activity is shown in Exhibit 5-2 in relation to these other front-end product develop-
ment activities, which collectively can be thought of as the concept development phase.

The concept development process illustrated in Exhibit 5-2 implies a distinction be-
tween customer needs and product specifications. This distinction is subtle but important.

<-. ‘1 <1 <1 <1 ‘1

Establish Generate Select Test Set Plan Plan
Target —> Product —> Product —> Product —> Final +Downstream—>

Specifications Concepts Concept(s) Concept(s) Specifications Development

 

 

 

Development

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Perform Economic Analysis
Benchmark Competitive Products

Build andTest Models and Prototypes

EXHIBIT 5-2 The customer-needs activity in relation to other concept development activities.Identifying Customer Needs 75

Needs are largely independent of any particular product we might develop; they are not
specific to the concept we eventually choose to pursue. A team should be able to identify
customer needs without knowing if or how it will eventually address those needs. On the
other hand, specifications do depend on the concept we select. The specifications for the
product we finally choose to develop will depend on what is technically and economically
feasible and on what our competitors offer in the marketplace, as well as on customer
needs. (See Chapter 6, Product Specifications, for a more detailed discussion of this
distinction.) Also note that we choose to use the word need to label any attribute of a po-
tential product that is desired by the customer; we do not distinguish here between a want
and a need. Other terms used in industrial practice to refer to customer needs include cus-
tomer attributes and customer requirements.

Identifying customer needs is itself a process, for which we present a five-step method.
We believe that a little structure goes a long way in facilitating effective product develop-
ment practices, and we hope and expect that this method will be viewed by those who
employ it not as a rigid process but rather as a starting point for continuous improvement
and refinement. The five steps are:

1. Gather raw data from customers.
2. Interpret the raw data in terms of customer needs.

3. Organize the needs into a hierarchy of primary, secondary, and (if necessary) tertiary
needs.

4. Establish the relative importance of the needs.
5. Reﬂect on the results and the process.

We treat each of the five steps in turn and illustrate the key points with the cordless
screwdriver example. We chose the screwdriver because it is simple enough that the
method is not hidden by the complexity of the example. However, note that the same
method, with minor adaptation, has been successfully applied to hundreds of products
ranging from kitchen utensils costing less than $10 to machine tools costing hundreds of
thousands of dollars.

Before beginning the development project, the firm typically specifies a particular
market opportunity and lays out the broad constraints and objectives for the project. This
information is frequently formalized as a mission statement (also sometimes called a
charter or a design brief). The mission statement specifies which direction to go in but
generally does not specify a precise destination or a particular way to proceed. The mis-
sion statement is the result of the product planning activities described in Chapter 4, Prod-
uct Planning. The mission statement for the cordless screwdriver is shown in Exhibit 5-3.

The cordless screwdriver category of products is already relatively well developed.
Such products are particularly well suited to a structured process for gathering customer
needs. One could reasonably ask whether a structured method is effective for completely
new categories of products with which customers have no experience. Satisfying needs is
just as important in revolutionary products as in incremental products. A necessary condi-
tion for product success is that a product offer perceived benefits to the customer. Products
offer benefits when they satisfy needs. This is true whether the product is an incremen-
tal variation on an existing product or whether it is a completely new product based on
a revolutionary invention. Developing an entirely new category of product is a risky
undertaking, and to some extent the only real indication of whether customer needs have76 Chapter 5

EXHIBIT 5-3
Mission
statement for
the cordless
screwdriver.

 

Mission Statement: Screwdriver Project

 

 

 

Product Description ' A handheld, power—assisted device for installing threaded
fasteners

Benefit Proposition . Drives screws more quickly and with less effort than by hand

Key Business Goals ' Product introduced in fourth quarter of 2010

' 50% gross margin
' 10% share of cordless screwdriver market by 2012

 

Primary Market . Do—it—yourself consumer

 

Secondary Markets ' Casual consumer
' _ight—duty professional

 

Assumptions - -Iandhe|d
Dower—assisted
Nickel-metal—hydride rechargeable battery technology

 

Stakeholders Jser

Reta iler

Sales force
Service center
Droduction

_egal department

 

 

been identified correctly is whether customers like the team’s first prototypes. Nevertheless,
in our opinion, a structured method for gathering data from customers remains useful and
can lower the inherent risk in developing a radically new product. Whether or not custom-
ers are able to fully articulate their latent needs, interaction with customers in the target
market will help the development team build a personal understanding of the user’s envi-
ronment and point of view. This information is always useful, even if it does not result in
the identification of every need the new product will address.

Step 1: Gather Raw Data from Customers

Consistent with our basic philosophy of creating a high-quality information channel di-
rectly from the customer, gathering data involves contact with customers and experience
with the use environment of the product. Three methods are commonly used:

1. Interviews: One or more development team members discusses needs with a single
customer. Interviews are usually conducted in the customer’s environment and typically
last one to two hours.

2. Focus groups: A moderator facilitates a two-hour discussion with a group of 8 to
12 customers. Focus groups are typically conducted in a special room equipped with a
two-way mirror allowing several members of the development team to observe the group.
In most cases, the moderator is a professional market researcher, but a member of the
development team sometimes moderates. The proceedings are usually video recorded. Par-
ticipants are usually paid a modest fee ($50 to $100 each) for their attendance. The total
cost of a focus group, including rental of the room, participant fees, video recording, and
refreshments, is about $5,000. In most U.S. cities, firms that recruit participants, moder-
ate focus groups, and/or rent facilities are listed in directories under “Market Research.”EXHIBIT 5-4

Comparison of
the percentages
of customer
needs that are
revealed for
focus groups
and interviews
as a function of
the number of
sessions. Note
that a focus
group lasts two
hours, while an
interview lasts
one hour.

Source: Griffin and
Hauser, 1993

Identifying Customer Needs 77

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

100‘—

80 ‘—
'u
.9
:5
c
a,
3 60 ‘—
U)
'u
a,
a,
Z
“6 40‘—
2:: O One-on-One Interview (1 hour)
g Focus Group (2 hours)
a.

20'—

I I I I I I I I I I
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Number of Interviews or Groups

3. Observing the product in use: Watching customers use an existing product or perform
a task for which a new product is intended can reveal important details about customer needs.
For example, a customer painting a house may use a screwdriver to open paint cans in addition
to driving screws. Observation may be completely passive, without any direct interaction with
the customer, or may involve working side by side with a customer, allowing members of the
development team to develop firsthand experience using the product. Ideally, team members
observe the product in the actual use environment. Procter & Gamble, for example, observes
thousands of customers every year in their homes or workplaces to better understand their
needs. For some products, such as do—it—yourself tools, actually using the products is simple
and natural; for others, such as surgical instruments, the team may have to use the products on
surrogate tasks (e.g., cutting fruit instead of human tissue when developing a new scalpel).

Some practitioners also rely on written surveys for gathering raw data. While a Web-
based survey is quite useful later in the process, we cannot recommend this approach
for initial efforts to identify customer needs; text-based surveys simply do not provide
enough information about the use environment of the product, and they are generally in-
effective in revealing unanticipated needs.

Research by Griffin and Hauser shows that one 2-hour focus group reveals about the
same number of needs as two l-hour interviews (Griffin and Hauser, 1993). (See Ex-
hibit 5-4.) Because interviews are usually less costly (per hour) than focus groups and
because an interview often allows the product development team to experience the use
environment of the product, we recommend that interviews be the primary data collec-
tion method. Interviews may be supplemented with one or two focus groups as a way to
allow top management to observe a group of customers or as a mechanism for sharing
a common customer experience (via video) with the members of a larger team. Some
practitioners believe that for certain products and customer groups, the interactions
among the participants of focus groups can elicit more varied needs than are revealed
through interviews, although this belief is not strongly supported by research findings.78 Chapter 5

Choosing Customers

Griffin and Hauser also addressed the question of how many customers to interview in
order to reveal most of the customer needs. In one study, they estimated that 90 percent of
the customer needs for picnic coolers were revealed after 30 interviews. In another study,
they estimated that 98 percent of the customer needs for a piece of office equipment were
revealed after 25 hours of data collection in both focus groups and interviews. As a practi-
cal guideline for most products, conducting fewer than 10 interviews is probably inadequate
and 50 interviews are probably too many. However, interviews can be conducted sequentially
and the process can be terminated when no new needs are revealed by additional interviews.
These guidelines apply to cases in which the development team is addressing a single market
segment. If the team wishes to gather customer needs from multiple distinct segments, then
the team may need to conduct 10 or more interviews in each segment. Concept development
teams consisting of more than 10 people usually collect data from plenty of customers sim-
ply by involving much of the team in the process. For example, if a lO-person team is divided
into five pairs and each pair conducts 6 interviews, the team conducts 30 interviews in total.

Needs can be identified more efficiently by interviewing lead users and/or extreme
users. According to von Hippel, lead users are customers who experience needs months
or years ahead of the majority of the market and stand to benefit substantially from prod-
uct innovations (von Hippel, 1988). These customers are particularly useful sources of
data for two reasons: (1) they are often able to articulate their emerging needs, because
they have had to struggle with the inadequacies of existing products, and (2) they may
have already invented solutions to meet their needs. By focusing a portion of the data col-
lection efforts on lead users, the team may be able to identify needs that, although explicit
for lead users, are still latent for the majority of the market. Developing products to meet
these latent needs allows a firm to anticipate trends and to leapfrog competitive products.

Extreme users are those who use the product in unusual ways or who have special
needs. For example, extreme users of the screwdriver might be people who have limited
vision or dexterity or those who use the tool professionally every day. Extreme users can
help the team identify needs that may be felt less acutely by the mainstream market, but
are nevertheless important opportunities for competitive advantage. For example, entre-
preneur Sam Farber created the original Good Grips vegetable peeler in response to the
needs of his wife who suffered from arthritis. Her extreme needs proved to be a reﬂection
of the latent need for more ergonomic kitchen tools among mainstream users.

The choice of which customers to interview is complicated when several different
groups of people can be considered “the customer.” For many products, one person (the
buyer) makes the buying decision and another person (the user) actually uses the product.
A good approach is to gather data from the end user of the product in all situations, and
in cases where other types of customers and stakeholders are clearly important, to gather
data from these people as well.

A customer selection matrix is useful for planning exploration of both market and cus-
tomer variety. Burchill suggests that market segments be listed on the left side of the ma-
trix while the different types of customers are listed across the top (Burchill et al., 1997),
as shown in Exhibit 5-5. The number of intended customer contacts is entered in each cell
to indicate the depth of coverage.

For industrial and commercial products, actually locating customers is usually a mat-
ter of making telephone calls or sending e-mail. In developing such products within anEXHIBIT 5-5

Customer
selection matrix
for the cordless
screwdriver
project.

Identifying Customer Needs 79

 

 

 

 

Retailer or Service
Lead Users Users Sales Outlet Centers
Homeowner
. O 5
(occasional use)
2
H
andy person 3 1O 3
(frequent use)
Professional 3 2 2
(heavy-duty use)

 

 

 

 

 

existing firm, a field sales force can often provide names of customers, although the team
must be careful about biasing the selection of customers toward those with allegiances to
a particular manufacturer. The Web or a telephone directory can be used to identify names
of some types of customers for some classes of products (e.g., building contractors or
insurance agents). For products that are integral to a customer’s job, getting someone to
agree to an interview is usually simple; these customers are eager to discuss their needs.
For consumer products, customers can also be located by making telephone calls or e-mail
inquiries. However, arranging a set of interviews for consumer products generally re-
quires more inquiries than for industrial or commercial products because the benefit of
participating in an interview is less direct for these customers.

The Art of Eliciting Customer Needs Data

The techniques we present here are aimed primarily at interviewing end users, but these
methods do apply to all of the three data-gathering modes and to all types of stakeholders.
The basic approach is to be receptive to information provided by customers and to avoid
confrontations or defensive posturing. Gathering needs data is very different from a sales
call: the goal is to elicit an honest expression of needs, not to convince a customer of what
he or she needs. In most cases customer interactions will be verbal; interviewers ask questions
and the customer responds. A prepared interview guide is valuable for structuring this
dialogue. Some helpful questions and prompts for use after the interviewers introduce
themselves and explain the purpose of the interview are:

° When and why do you use this type of product?

0 Walk us through atypical session using the product.

° What do you like about the existing products?

° What do you dislike about the existing products?

° What issues do you consider when purchasing the product?
0 What improvements would you make to the product?

Here are some general hints for effective interaction with customers:

° G0 with the ﬂow. If the customer is providing useful information, do not worry about
conforming to the interview guide. The goal is to gather important data on customer
needs, not to complete the interview guide in the allotted time.80 Chapter 5

° Use visual stimuli and props. Bring a collection of existing and competitors’ products,
or even products that are tangentially related to the product under development. At the
end of a session, the interviewers might even show some preliminary product concepts
to get customers’ early reactions to various approaches.

° Suppress preconceived hypotheses about the product technology. Frequently custom-
ers will make assumptions about the product concept they expect would meet their
needs. In these situations, the interviewers should avoid biasing the discussion with as-
sumptions about how the product will eventually be designed or produced. When cus-
tomers mention specific technologies or product features, the interviewer should probe
for the underlying need the customer believes the suggested solution would satisfy.

° Have the customer demonstrate the product and/or typical tasks related to the prod-
uct. If the interview is conducted in the use environment, a demonstration is usually
convenient and invariably reveals new information.

° Be alert for surprises and the expression of latent needs. If a customer mentions
something surprising, pursue the lead with follow-up questions. Frequently, an unex-
pected line of questioning will reveal latent needs—important dimensions of the cus-
tomers’ needs that are neither fulfilled nor commonly articulated and understood.

° Watch for nonverbal information. The process described in the chapter is aimed at
developing better physical products. Unfortunately, words are not always the best way
to communicate needs related to the physical world. This is particularly true of needs
involving the human dimensions of the product, such as comfort, image, or style. The
development team must be constantly aware of the nonverbal messages provided by
customers. What are their facial expressions? How do they hold competitors’ products?

Note that many of our suggested questions and guidelines assume that the customer has
some familiarity with products similar to the new product under development. This is al-
most always true. For example, even before the first cordless screwdriver became available,
people installed fasteners. Developing an understanding of customer needs as they relate to
the general fastening task would still have been beneficial in developing the first cordless
tool. Similarly, understanding the needs of customers using other types of cordless appli-
ances, such as electric razors, would also have been useful. We can think of no product so
revolutionary that there would be no analogous products or tasks from which the develop-
ment team could learn. However, in gathering needs relating to truly revolutionary products
with which customers have no experience, the interview questions should be focused on the
task or situation in which the new product will be applied, rather than on the product itself

Documenting Interactions with Customers

Four methods are commonly used for documenting interactions with customers:

1. Audio recording: Making an audio recording of the interview is very easy. Unfor-
tunately, transcribing the recording into text is very time consuming, and hiring someone
to do it can be expensive. Also, audio recording has the disadvantage of being intimidat-
ing to some customers.

2. Notes: Handwritten notes are the most common method of documenting an inter-
view. Designating one person as the primary notetaker allows the other person to concen-
trate on effective questioning. The notetaker should strive to capture some of the wordingIdentifying Customer Needs 81

of every customer statement verbatim. These notes, if transcribed immediately after the
interview, can be used to create a description of the interview that is very close to an ac-
tual transcript. This debriefing immediately after the interview also facilitates sharing of
insights between the interviewers.

3. Video recording: Video recording is almost always used to document a focus group
session. It is also very useful for documenting observations of the customer in the use en-
vironment and/or using existing products. The video recording is useful for bringing new
team members “up to speed” and is also useful as raw material for presentations to upper
management. Multiple viewings of video recordings of customers in action often facili-
tate the identification of latent customer needs. Video recording is also useful for captur-
ing many aspects of the end user’s environment.

4. Still photography: Taking photographs provides many of the benefits of video re-
cording, but is usually less intrusive and therefore easier to do while observing customers
in the field. Additional advantages of still photography are ease of display of the photos,
excellent image quality, and readily available equipment. The primary disadvantage is the
relative inability to record dynamic information.

The final result of the data-gathering phase of the process is a set of raw data, usually in the
form of customer statements but frequently supplemented by video recordings or photographs.
A data template implemented in a spreadsheet is useful for organizing these raw data. Exhibit
5-6 is an example of a portion of such a template. We recommend that the template be filled
in as soon as possible after the interaction with the customer and edited by the other develop-
ment team members present during the interaction. The first column in the main body of the
template indicates the question or prompt that elicited the customer data. The second column
is a list of verbatim statements the customer made or an observation of a customer action
(from a video recording or from direct observation). The third column contains the customer
needs implied by the raw data. Some emphasis should be placed on investigating clues that
may identify potential latent needs. Such clues may be in the form of hLunorous remarks, less
serious suggestions, frustrations, nonverbal information, or observations and descriptions of
the use environment. The symbol (I) is used in Exhibit 5-6 to ﬂag potential latent needs. Tech-
niques for interpreting the raw data in terms of customer needs are given in the next section.

The final task in step 1 is to write thank-you notes to the customers involved in the
process. Invariably, the team will need to solicit further customer information, so develop-
ing and maintaining a good rapport with a set of users is important.

Step 2: Interpret Raw Data in Terms of Customer Needs

Customer needs are expressed as written statements and are the result of interpreting the
need underlying the raw data gathered from the customers. Each statement or observation
(as listed in the second column of the data template) may be translated into any number of
customer needs. Griffin and Hauser found that multiple analysts may translate the same
interview notes into different needs, so it is useful to have more than one team member
conducting the translation process. Below we provide five guidelines for writing need
statements. The first two guidelines are fundamental and are critical to effective translation;
the remaining three guidelines ensure consistency of phrasing and style across all team
members. Exhibit 5-7 provides examples to illustrate each guideline.82 Chapter 5

 

Customer:
Address:

Telephone:
Willing to do follow-up?

Bill Esposito

100 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139
617-864-1274

Yes

Date:

lnterviewer(s):

Currently uses:
Type of user:

Jonathan and Lisa
19 December 2010

Craftsman Model A3
Building maintenance

 

Question/ Prompt

Customer Statement

Interpreted Need

 

Typical uses

need to drive screws fast, faster than
by hand.

we SD drives screws faster than
by hand.

 

sometimes do duct work; use sheet
metal screws.

we SD drives sheet metal screws into
metal duct work.

 

A lot of electrical; switch covers, outlets,
'ans, kitchen appliances.

we S) can be used for screws on
e ectrical devices.

 

Likes—current tool

like the pistol grip; it feels the best.

we SD is comfortable to grip.

 

like the magnetized tip.

we SD tip retains the screw before it is
driven.

 

Dislikes—current tool

don't like it when the tip slips off
the screw.

 

we SD tip remains aligned with the
screw head without slipping.

 

 

would like to be able to lock it so I can
use it with a dead battery.

we user can apply torque manually to
the SD to drive a screw. (l)

 

Can’t drive screws into hard wood.

we SD can drive screws into hard wood.

 

Sometimes I strip tough screws.

we SD does not strip screw heads.

 

Suggested improvements

An attachment to allow me to reach down
skinny holes.

we SD can access screws at the end of
deep, narrow holes.

 

A point so I can scrape paint off of screws.

we SD allows the user to work with
screws that have been painted over.

 

 

Would be nice if it could punch a
pilot hole.

 

 

 

we SD can be used to create a pilot
hole. (l)

 

EXHIBIT 5-6 Customer data template filled in with sample customer statements and interpreted needs. SD is
an abbreviation for screwdriver. (Note that this template represents a partial list from a single interview. A typical
interview session may elicit more than 50 customer statements and interpreted needs.)

° Express the need in terms of What the product has to do, not in terms of how it might
do it. Customers often express their preferences by describing a solution concept or an
implementation approach; however, the need statement should be expressed in terms

independent of a particular technological solution.

° Express the need as specifically as the raw data. Needs can be expressed at many dif-

ferent levels of detail. To avoid loss of information, express the need at the same level

of detail as the raw data.

° Use positive, not negative, phrasing. Subsequent translation of a need into a product
specification is easier if the need is expressed as a positive statement. This is not a
rigid guideline, because sometimes positive phrasing is difficult and awkward. For
example, one of the need statements in Exhibit 5-6 is “the screwdriver does not strip

screw heads.” This need is more naturally expressed in a negative form.Identifying Customer Needs 83

 

Guideline

”What” not "how”

Specificity

Positive not negative

An attribute of the product

Avoid "must” and "should”

Customer
Statement

"Why don't you put
protective shields around
the battery contacts?"

"I drop my screwdriver all
the time."

"It doesn’t matter if it's
raining; I still need to work
outside on Saturdays."
"I'd like to charge my
battery from my cigarette
lighter."

”I hate it when Idon’t
know how much juice is
left in the batteries of my
cordless tools."

Need Statement—
Right

The screwdriver battery is
protected from accidental
shorting.

The screwdriver operates
normally after repeated
dropping.

The screwdriver operates
normally in the rain.

The screwdriver battery
can be charged from an
automobile cigarette
lighter.

The screwdriver provides
an indication of the energy
level of the battery.

Need Statement—
Wrong

The screwdriver battery
contacts are covered by
a plastic sliding door.
The screwdriver is rugged.

The screwdriver is not
disabled by the rain.

An automobile cigarette
lighter adapter can
charge the screwdriver
battery.

The screwdriver should
provide an indication of
the energy level of the
battery.

 

EXHIBIT 5-7 Examples illustrating the guidelines for writing need statements.

° Express the need as an attribute of the product. Wording needs as statements about
the product ensures consistency and facilitates subsequent translation into product
specifications. Not all needs can be cleanly expressed as attributes of the product,
however, and in most of these cases the needs can be expressed as attributes of the user

of the product (e.g., “the user can apply torque manually to the screwdriver to drive a
screw” .

° Avoid the words must and should. The words must and should imply a level of im-
portance for the need. Rather than casually assigning a binary importance rating (must
versus should) to the needs at this point, we recommend deferring the assessment of
the importance of each need until step 4.

The list of customer needs is the superset of all the needs elicited from all the inter-

viewed customers in the target market. Some needs may not be technologically realizable.
The constraints of technical and economic feasibility are incorporated into the process
of establishing product specifications in subsequent development steps. (See Chapter 6,
Product Specifications.) In some cases customers will have expressed conﬂicting needs.
At this point in the process the team does not attempt to resolve such conﬂicts, but simply
documents both needs. Deciding how to address conﬂicting needs is one of the challenges
of the subsequent concept development activities.

Step 3: Organize the Needs into a Hierarchy

The result of steps 1 and 2 should be a list of 50 to 300 need statements. Such a large
number of detailed needs is awkward to work with and difficult to summarize for use in
subsequent development activities. The goal of step 3 is to organize these needs into 3 hi-
erarchical list. The list will typically consist of a set of primary needs, each one of which84 Chapter 5

will be further characterized by a set of secondary needs. In cases of very complex prod-
ucts, the secondary needs may be broken down into tertiary needs as well. The primary
needs are the most general needs, while the secondary and tertiary needs express needs in
more detail. Exhibit 5-8 shows the resulting hierarchical list of needs for the screwdriver
example. For the screwdriver, there are 15 primary needs and 49 secondary needs. Note
that two of the primary needs have no associated secondary needs.

The procedure for organizing the needs into a hierarchical list is intuitive, and many
teams can successfully complete the task without detailed instructions. For completeness,
we provide a step-by-step procedure here. This activity is best performed on a wall or a
large table by a small group of team members.

1. Print or write each need statement on a separate card or self-stick note. A print
macro can be easily written to print the need statements directly from the data template. A
nice feature of this approach is that the need can be printed in a large font in the center of
the card and then the original customer statement and other relevant information can be
printed in a small font at the bottom of the card for easy reference. Four cards can be cut
from a standard printed sheet.

2. Eliminate redundant statements. Those cards expressing redundant need state-
ments can be stapled together and treated as a single card. Be careful to consolidate only
those statements that are identical in meaning.

3. Group the cards according to the similarity of the needs they express. At this point,
the team should attempt to create groups of roughly three to seven cards that express similar
needs. The logic by which groups are created deserves special attention. Novice develop-
ment teams often create groups according to a technological perspective, clustering needs
relating to, for example, materials, packaging, or power. Or they create groups according to
assumed physical components such as enclosure, bits, switch, and battery. Both of these ap-
proaches are dangerous. Recall that the goal of the process is to create a description of the
needs of the customer. For this reason, the groupings should be consistent with the way cus-
tomers think about their needs and not with the way the development team thinks about the
product. The groups should correspond to needs customers would view as similar. In fact,
some practitioners use a process in which customers actually organize the need statements.

4. For each group, choose a label. The label is itself a statement of need that general-
izes all of the needs in the group. It can be selected from one of the needs in the group, or
the team can write a new need statement.

5. Consider creating supergroups consisting of two to five groups. If there are fewer
than 20 groups, then a two-level hierarchy is probably sufficient to organize the data. In
this case, the group labels are primary needs and the group members are secondary needs.
However, if there are more than 20 groups, the team may consider creating supergroups,
and therefore a third level in the hierarchy. The process of creating supergroups is identi-
cal to the process of creating groups. As with the previous step, cluster groups according
to similarity of the need they express and then create or select a supergroup label. These
supergroup labels become the primary needs, the group labels become the secondary
needs, and the members of the groups become tertiary needs.

6. Review and edit the organized needs statements. There is no single correct ar-
rangement of needs in a hierarchy. At this point, the team may wish to consider alternative
groupings or labels and may engage another group to suggest alternative arrangements.Identifying Customer Needs 85

 

**

***

*I

**

**

**

***

***

***

***

**|

**

The SD provides plenty of power to drive
screws.

"we SD maintains power for several hours of
heavy use.

we S) can drive screws into hardwood.

we SD drives sheet metal screws into metal
ductwork.

we SD drives screws faster than by hand.

The SD makes it easy to start a screw.
"we SD retains the screw before it is driven.
we S) can be used to create a pilot hole.

The SD works with a variety of screws.

"we S) can turn Phillips, Torx, socket, and hex
head screws.

we S) can turn many sizes of screws.

The SD can access most screws.

"we S) can be maneuvered in tight areas.

we S) can access screws at the end of deep,
narrow holes.

 

 

 

The SD turns screws that are in poor condition.
"we S) can be used to remove grease and dirt
from screws.

The SD feels good in the user's hand.
we SD is comfortable when the user pushes on it.

we SD is balanced in the user's hand.

we SD is equally easy to use in right or left hands.
we SD weight is just right.

we SD is warm to touch in cold weather.

we SD remains comfortable when left in the sun.

 

The SD is easy to control while turning screws.
we user can easily push on the SD.

we user can easily resist the SD twisting.

we SD can be locked "on.”

we SD speed can be controlled by the user while
turning a screw.

we SD remains aligned with the screw head
without slipping.

we user can easily see where the screw is.

we SD does not strip screw heads.

we SD is easily reversible.

 

 

we SD allows the user to work with painted screws.

we SD is comfortable when the user resists twisting.

***

**|

**

**

*I

***

The SD is easy to set up and use.

The SD is easy to turn on.

The SD prevents inadvertent switching off.

The user can set the maximum torque of the SD.

The SD provides ready access to bits or accessories.

The SD can be attached to the user for temporary
storage.

The SD power is convenient.

The SD is easy to recharge.

The SD can be used while recharging.

The SD recharges quickly.

The SD batteries are ready to use when new.

The user can apply torque manually to the SD to
drive a screw.

The SD lasts a long time.

The SD tip survives heavy use.

The SD can be hammered.

The SD can be dropped from a ladder without
damage.

The SD is easy to store.

"we SD fits in a toolbox easily.

we S) can be charged while in storage.

we SD resists corrosion when left outside or in
damp places.

we SD maintains its charge after long periods
of storage.

we SD maintains its charge when wet.

The SD prevents damage to the work.
"we SD prevents damage to the screw head.
we SD prevents scratching of finished surfaces.

 

 

 

The SD has a pleasant sound when in use.
The SD looks like a professional quality tool.

The SD is safe.
The SD can be used on electrical devices.
The SD does not cut the user's hands.

 

EXHIBIT 5-8 Hierarchical list of primary and secondary customer needs for the cordless screwdriver. Importance
ratings for the secondary needs are indicated by the number of *’s, with *** denoting critically important needs. Latent
needs are denoted by !.86 Chapter 5

The process is more complicated when the team attempts to reﬂect the needs of two
or more distinct market segments. There are at least two approaches that can be taken
to address this challenge. First, the team can label each need with the segment (and pos-
sibly the name) of the customer from whom the need was elicited. This way, differences
in needs across segments can be observed directly. One practical visual technique for this
labeling is to use different colors of paper for the cards on which the needs statements are
written, with each color corresponding to a different market segment. The other approach
to multiple market segments is to perform the clustering process separately for each
market segment. Using this approach, the team can observe differences both in the needs
themselves and in the ways in which these needs are best organized. We recommend that
the team adopt this parallel, independent approach when the segments are very different
in their needs and when there is some doubt about the ability of the team to address the
different segments with the same product.

Step 4: Establish the Relative Importance of the Needs

The hierarchical list alone does not provide any information on the relative importance that
customers place on different needs. Yet the development team will have to make trade-offs
and allocate resources in designing the product. A sense of the relative importance of the
various needs is essential to making these trade-offs correctly. Step 4 in the needs process
establishes the relative importance of the customer needs identified in steps 1 through 3.
The outcome of this step is a numerical importance weighting for a subset of the needs.
There are two basic approaches to the task: (1) relying on the consensus of the team mem-
bers based on their experience with customers, or (2) basing the importance assessment on
further customer surveys. The obvious trade-off between the two approaches is cost and
speed versus accuracy: the team can make an educated assessment of the relative impor-
tance of the needs in one meeting, while a customer survey generally takes a minimum of
two weeks. In most cases we believe the customer survey is important and worth the time
required to complete it. Other development tasks, such as concept generation and analysis
of competitive products, can begin before the relative importance surveys are complete.

The team should at this point have developed a rapport with a group of customers. These
same customers can be surveyed to rate the relative importance of the needs that have been
identified. The survey can be done in person, by telephone, via the Internet, or by mail. Few
customers will respond to a survey asking them to evaluate the importance of 100 needs,
so typically the team will work with only a subset of the needs. A practical limit on how
many needs can be addressed in a customer survey is about 50. This limit is not too severe,
however, because many of the needs are either obviously important (e.g., the screwdriver
fits in a toolbox easily) or are easy to implement (e.g., the screwdriver prevents inadvertent
switching off). The team can therefore limit the scope of the survey by querying customers
only about needs that are likely to give rise to difficult technical trade-offs or costly features
in the product design. Such needs would include the need to vary speed, the need to drive
screws into hardwood, and the need to have the screwdriver emit a pleasant sound. Alterna-
tively the team could develop a set of surveys to ask a variety of customers each about dif-
ferent subsets of the needs list. There are many survey designs for establishing the relative
importance of customer needs. One good design is illustrated by the portion of the cordless
screwdriver survey shown in Exhibit 5-9. In addition to asking for importance ratings, thisIdentifying Customer Needs 87

 

Cordless Screwdriver Survey

 

For each of the following cordless screwdriver features, please indicate on a scale ofl to 5 how important the feature
is to you. Please use the following scale:

1. Feature is undesirable. I would not consider a product with this feature.
2. Feature is not important, but I would not mind having it.

3. Feature would be nice to have, but is not necessary.

4. Feature is highly desirable, but I would consider a product without it.
5. Feature is critical. I would not consider a product without this feature.

Also indicate by checking the box to the right if you feel that the feature is unique, exciting, and/or unexpected.

Importance of feature Check box if feature is unique,

on scale ofl to 5

__ The screwdriver maintains power for several hours of heavy use.

__ The screwdriver can drive screws into hardwood.

__ The screwdriver speed can be controlled by the user while turning a screw.
__ The screwdriver has a pleasant sound when in use.

exciting, and/or unexpected.

EJEJEJEJ

And so forth.

 

EXHIBIT 5-9 Example importance survey (partial).

survey asks the respondent to explicitly identify the needs that are unique or unexpected.
This information can be used to help the team identify latent needs.

The survey responses for each need statement can be characterized in a variety of
ways: by the mean, by the standard deviation, or by the number of responses in each
category. The responses can then be used to assign an importance weighting to the need
statements. The same scale of l to 5 can be used to summarize the importance data. The
needs in Exhibit 5-8 are rated according to the survey data, with the importance ratings
denoted by the number of *’s next to each need statement and the latent needs denoted by
!. Note that no critical needs are also latent needs. This is because if a need were critical,
customers would not be surprised or excited by it; they would expect it to be met.

Step 5: Reflect on the Results and the Process

The final step in the method is to reﬂect on the results and the process. While the process
of identifying customer needs can be usefully structured, it is not an exact science. The
team must challenge its results to verify that they are consistent with the knowledge and
intuition the team has developed through many hours of interaction with customers. Some
questions to ask include:

° Have we interacted with all of the important types of customers in our target market?

° Are we able to see beyond needs related only to existing products in order to capture
the latent needs of our target customers?

0 Are there areas of inquiry we should pursue in follow-up interviews or surveys?

° Which of the customers we spoke to would be good participants in our ongoing devel-
opment efforts?88 Chapter 5

What do we know now that we didn’t know when we started? Are we surprised by any
of the needs?

Did we involve everyone within our own organization who needs to deeply understand
customer needs?

How might we improve the process in future efforts?

 

Summary

Identifying customer needs is an integral part of the concept development phase of the
product development process. The resulting customer needs are used to guide the team in
establishing product specifications, generating product concepts, and selecting a product
concept for further development.

0 The process of identifying customer needs includes five steps:

1. Gather raw data from customers.

2. Interpret the raw data in terms of customer needs.
3. Organize the needs into a hierarchy.

4. Establish the relative importance of the needs.

5. Reﬂect on the results and the process.

Creating a high-quality information channel from customers to the product developers
ensures that those who directly control the details of the product, including the product
designers, fully understand the needs of the customer.

Lead users are a good source of customer needs because they experience new needs
months or years ahead of most customers and because they stand to benefit substan-
tially from new product innovations. Furthermore, they are frequently able to articulate
their needs more clearly than typical customers. Extreme users have special needs
which may reﬂect latent needs among mainstream users.

Latent needs may be even more important than explicit needs in determining customer
satisfaction. Latent needs are those that many customers recognize as important in a
final product but do not or cannot articulate in advance.

Customer needs should be expressed in terms of what the product has to do, not in
terms of how the product might be implemented. Adherence to this principle leaves
the development team with maximum ﬂexibility to generate and select product
concepts.

The key benefits of the method are: ensuring that the product is focused on customer
needs and that no critical customer need is forgotten; developing a clear understanding
among members of the development team of the needs of the customers in the target
market; developing a fact base to be used in generating concepts, selecting a product
concept, and establishing product specifications; and creating an archival record of the
needs phase of the development process.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.netExercises

Identifying Customer Needs 89

Concept engineering is a method developed by Burchill at MIT in collaboration with
the Center for Quality of Management. This chapter benefits from our observations of
the development and application of concept engineering. For a complete and detailed
description of concept engineering, see:
Burchill, Gary, et al., Concept Engineering, Center for Quality of Management,
Cambridge, MA, Document No. ML0080, 1997.

The research by Griffin and Hauser validates different methods for extracting needs from
interview data. Their study of the fraction of needs identified as a function of the number

of customers interviewed is particularly interesting.
Griffin, Abbie, and John R. Hauser, “The Voice of the Customer,” Marketing Science,

Vol. 12, No. 1, Winter 1993, pp. 1—27.

Kinnear and Taylor thoroughly discuss data collection methods and survey design.
Kinnear, Thomas C., and James R. Taylor, Marketing Research: An Applied
Approach, fifth edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995.

Norman has written extensively on user needs, especially as related to the cognitive

challenges of using products.
Norman, Donald A., The Design of Everyday Things, Doubleday, New York, 1990.

Payne’s book is a detailed and interesting discussion of how to pose questions in surveys.
Payne, Stanley L., T he Art of Asking Questions, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ, 1980.

Total quality management (TQM) provides a valuable perspective on how identifying
customer needs fits into an overall effort to improve the quality of goods and services.
Shiba, Shoji, Alan Graham, and David Walden, A New American T QM:
Four Practical Revolutions in Management, Productivity Press, Cambridge, MA, and
The Center for Quality of Management, Cambridge, MA, 1993.

Urban and Hauser provide a thorough discussion of how to create hierarchies of needs
(along with many other topics).
Urban, Glen L., and John R. Hauser, Design and Marketing of New Products, second
edition, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1993.

Von Hippel describes many years of research on the role of lead users in innovation. He
provides useful guidelines for identifying lead users.
von Hippel, Eric, The Sources of Innovation, Oxford University Press, New York, 1988.

1. Translate the following customer statements about a student book bag into proper
needs statements:

a. “See how the leather on the bottom of the bag is all scratched; it’s ugly.”

b. “When I’m standing in line at the cashier trying to find my checkbook while bal-
ancing my bag on my knee, I feel like a stor .”

c. “This bag is my life; ifl lose it I’m in big trouble.”90 Chapter 5

d. “There’s nothing worse than a banana that’s been squished by the edge of a textbook.”
e. “I never use both straps on my knapsack; I just sling it over one shoulder.”

. Observe someone performing an everyday task. (Ideally, you should choose a task

for which you can observe different users performing the task repeatedly.) Identify
frustrations and difficulties encountered by these people. Identify the latent customer
needs.

. Choose a product that continually annoys you. Identify the needs the developers of this

product missed. Why do you think these needs were not met? Do you think the devel-
opers deliberately ignored these needs?

Thought Questions

1. One of the reasons the method is effective is that it involves the entire development

team. Unfortunately, the method can become unwieldy with a team of more than 10
people. How might you modify the method to maximize involvement yet maintain a
focused and decisive effort given a large development team?

. Can the process of identifying customer needs lead to the creation of innovative prod-

uct concepts? In what ways? Could a structured process of identifying customer needs
lead to a fundamentally new product concept like the Post-it Note?CHAPTER SIX

Product Specifications

 

Courtesy of Specialized Bicycle Components

EXHIBIT 6-1

One of Specialized’s existing mountain bikes with a suspension fork.

9192 Chapter 6

Specialized Bicycle Components was interested in developing a new front suspension
fork for the mountain bike market. Although the firm was already selling suspension
forks on its bicycles (Exhibit 6-1), it was interested in exploring designs that would pro-
vide higher value for the recreational cyclist.

The development team had spent a great deal of time identifying customer needs. In
addition to logging many hours of riding on suspended bikes themselves, the members
of the team had interviewed lead users at mountain bike races and recreational cyclists
on local trails, and they also had spent time working with dealers in their stores. As a re-
sult of this process they had assembled a list of customer needs. They now faced several
challenges:

° How could the relatively subjective customer needs be translated into precise targets
for the remaining development effort?

° How could the team and its senior management agree on what would constitute suc-
cess or failure of the resulting product design?

° How could the team develop confidence that its intended product would garner a sub-
stantial share of the suspension fork market?

° How could the team resolve the inevitable trade-offs among product characteristics
like cost and weight?

This chapter presents a method for establishing product specifications. We assume that

the customer needs are already documented as described in Chapter 5, Identifying Cus-
tomer Needs. The method employs several simple information systems, all of which can
be constructed using conventional spreadsheet software.

What Are Specifications?

Customer needs are generally expressed in the “language of the customer.” The primary
customer needs for the suspension fork are listed in Exhibit 6-2. Customer needs such
as “the suspension is easy to install” or “the suspension enables high-speed descents on
bumpy trails” are typical in terms of the subjective quality of the expressions. However,
while such expressions are helpful in developing a clear sense of the issues of interest
to customers, they provide little specific guidance about how to design and engineer the
product. They simply leave too much margin for subjective interpretation. For this reason,
development teams usually establish a set of specifications, which spell out in precise,
measurable detail what the product has to do. Product specifications do not tell the team
how to address the customer needs, but they do represent an unambiguous agreement on
what the team will attempt to achieve in order to satisfy the customer needs. For example,
in contrast to the customer need that “the suspension is easy to install,” the corresponding
specification might be that “the average time to assemble the fork to the frame is less than
75 seconds.”

We intend the term product Specifications to mean the precise description of what
the product has to do. Some firms use the terms “product requirements” or “engineering
characteristics” in this way. Other firms use “specifications” or “technical specifications”
to refer to key design variables of the product such as the oil viscosity or spring constant
of the suspension system. These are just differences in terminology. For clarity, let us beEXHIBIT 6-2

Customer

needs for the
suspension fork
and their relative
importance
(shown in a
convenient
spreadsheet
format).

Product Specifications

93

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

No. Need Imp.
1 we suspension reduces vibration to the hands. 3
2 we suspension allows easy traversal of slow, difficult terrain. 2
3 we suspension enables high—speed descents on bumpy trails. 5
4 we suspension allows sensitivity adjustment. 3
5 we suspension preserves the steering characteristics of the bike. 4
6 we suspension remains rigid during hard cornering. 4
7 we suspension is lightweight. 4
8 we suspension provides stiff mounting points for the brakes. 2
9 we suspension fits a wide variety of bikes, wheels, and tires. 5

10 we suspension is easy to install. 1
11 we suspension works with fenders. 1
12 we suspension instills pride. 5
13 we suspension is affordable for an amateur enthusiast. 5
14 we suspension is not contaminated by water. 5
15 we suspension is not contaminated by grunge. 5
16 we suspension can be easily accessed for maintenance. 3
17 we suspension allows easy replacement of worn parts. 1
18 we suspension can be maintained with readily available tools. 3
19 we suspension lasts a long time. 5
20 we suspension is safe in a crash. 5

 

 

 

 

precise about a few definitions. A Specification (singular) consists of a metric and a value.
For example, “average time to assemble” is a metric, while “less than 75 seconds” is the
value of this metric. Note that the value may take on several forms, including a particular
number, a range, or an inequality. Values are always labeled with the appropriate units
(e.g., seconds, kilograms, joules). Together, the metric and value form a specification.
The product Specifications (plural) are simply the set of the individual specifications.

When Are Specifications Established?

In an ideal world, the team would establish the product specifications once early in the
development process and then proceed to design and engineer the product to exactly
meet those specifications. For some products, such as soap or soup, this approach works
quite well; the technologists on the team can reliably concoct a formulation that satis-
fies almost any reasonable specifications. However, for technology-intensive products
this is rarely possible. For such products, specifications are established at least twice.
Immediately after identifying the customer needs, the team sets target Specifications.
These specifications represent the hopes and aspirations of the team, but they are estab-
lished before the team knows what constraints the product technology will place on what94 Chapter 6

 

 
   

 

 

 

    

<-‘ <-| <-| <-| <-| <-| <-‘
I I I I I I I
Mission ' ' ' ' ' Development
Statement Identify Establish Generate Select Test Plan Plan
—> Customer Target Product —> Product —> Product Final Downstream —>
Needs Specifications Concepts Concept(s) Concept(s) Specifications Development

 

     

     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Perform Economic Analysis
Benchmark Competitive Products

Build andTest Models and Prototypes

EXHIBIT 6-3 The concept development process. The target specifications are set early in the process, but setting
the final specifications must wait until after the product concept has been selected.

can be achieved. The team’s efforts may fail to meet some of these specifications and
may exceed others, depending on the product concept the team eventually selects. For
this reason, the target specifications must be refined after a product concept has been se-
lected. The team revisits the specifications while assessing the actual technological con-
straints and the expected production costs. To set the ﬁnal Specifications, the team must
frequently make hard trade-offs among different desirable characteristics of the product.
For simplicity, we present a two-stage process for establishing specifications, but we
note that in some organizations specifications are revisited many times throughout the
development process.

The two stages in which specifications are established are shown as part of the concept
development process in Exhibit 6-3. Note that the final specifications are one of the key
elements of the development plan, which is usually documented in the project’s contract
book. The contract book (described in Chapter 18, Managing Projects) specifies what the
team agrees to achieve, the project schedule, the required resources, and the economic
implications for the business. The list of product specifications is also one of the key
information systems used by the team throughout the development process.

This chapter presents two methods: the first is for establishing the target specifications
and the second is for setting the final specifications after the product concept has been
selected.

Establishing Target Specifications

As Exhibit 6-3 illustrates, the target specifications are established after the customer
needs have been identified but before product concepts have been generated and the most
promising one(s) selected. An arbitrary setting of the specifications may not be techni-
cally feasible. For example, in designing a suspension fork, the team cannot assume in ad-
vance that it will be able to achieve simultaneously a mass of l kilogram, a manufacturing
cost of $30, and the best descent time on the test track, as these are three quite aggressive
specifications. Actually meeting the specifications established at this point is contingent
upon the details of the product concept the team eventually selects. For this reason, such
preliminary specifications are labeled “target specifications.” They are the goals of the
development team, describing a product that the team believes would succeed in the mar-
ketplace. Later these specifications will be refined based on the limitations of the product
concept actually selected.Product Specifications 95

The process of establishing the target specifications contains four steps:

Prepare the list of metrics.
Collect competitive benchmarking information.
Set ideal and marginally acceptable target values.

:bP’Nt‘

Reﬂect on the results and the process.

Step 1: Prepare the List of Metrics

The most useful metrics are those that reﬂect as directly as possible the degree to which the
product satisfies the customer needs. The relationship between needs and metrics is central
to the entire concept of specifications. The working assmnption is that a translation from cus-
tomer needs to a set of precise, measurable specifications is possible and that meeting specifi-
cations will therefore lead to satisfaction of the associated customer needs.

A list of metrics is shown in Exhibit 6-4. A good way to generate the list of metrics is to
contemplate each need in turn and to consider what precise, measurable characteristic of the
product will reﬂect the degree to which the product satisfies that need. In the ideal case, there
is one and only one metric for each need. In practice, this is frequently not possible.

For example, consider the need that the suspension be “easy to install.” The team
may conclude that this need is largely captured by measuring the time required
for assembly of the fork to the frame. However, note the possible subtleties in this
translation. Is assembly time really identical to ease of installation? The installation
could be extremely fast but require an awkward and painful set of finger actions, which
ultimately may lead to worker injury or dealer frustration. Because of the imprecise
nature of the translation process, those establishing the specifications should have
been directly involved in identifying the customer needs. In this way the team can rely
on its understanding of the meaning of each need statement derived from firsthand
interactions with customers.

The need for the fork to reduce vibration to the user’s hands may be even more difficult
to translate into a single metric, because there are many different conditions under which
vibration can be transmitted, including small bumps on level roads and big bumps on
rough trails. The team may conclude that several metrics are required to capture this need,
including, for example, the metrics “attenuation from dropout to handlebar at 10 Hz” and
“maximum value from the Monster.” (The “Monster” is a suspension test developed by
Mountain Bike magazine.)

A simple needs-metrics matrix represents the relationship between needs and metrics.
An example needs-metrics matrix is shown in Exhibit 6-5. The rows of the matrix cor-
respond to the customer needs, and the columns of the matrix correspond to the metrics.
A mark in a cell of the matrix means that the need and the metric associated with the
cell are related; performance relative to the metric will inﬂuence the degree to which the
product satisfies the customer need. This matrix is a key element of the House of Quality,
a graphical technique used in Quality Function Deployment, or QFD (Hauser and Claus-
ing, 1988). In many cases, we find the information in the needs-metrics matrix is just as
easily communicated by listing the numbers of the needs related to each metric alongside
the list of metrics (the second column in Exhibit 6-4). There are some cases, however, in
which the mapping from needs to metrics is complex, and the matrix can be quite useful
for representing this mapping.96 Chapter 6

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Metric No. Need Nos. Metric Imp. Units
1 1, 3 Attenuation from dropout to handlebar at 10 Hz 3 dB
2 2, 6 Spring preload 3 N
3 1, 3 Maximum value from the Monster 5 g
4 1, 3 Minimum descent time on test track 5 s
5 4 Damping coefficient adjustment range 3 N-s/m
6 5 Maximum travel (26—in. wheel) 3 mm
7 5 Rake offset 3 mm
8 6 Lateral stiffness at the tip 3 kN/m
9 7 Total mass 4 kg
10 8 Lateral stiffness at brake pivots 2 l<N/m
11 9 Headset sizes 5 in.
12 9 Steertube length 5 mm
13 9 Wheel sizes 5 List
14 9 Maximum tire width 5 in.
15 10 Time to assemble to frame 1 s
16 11 Fender compatibility 1 _ist
17 12 Instills pride 5 Subj.
18 13 Unit manufacturing cost 5 JS$
19 14 Time in spray chamber without water entry 5 s
20 15 Cycles in mud chamber without contamination 5 —cycles
21 16, 17 Time to disassemble/assemble for maintenance 3 s
22 17, 18 Special tools required for maintenance 3 _ist
23 19 UV test duration to degrade rubber parts 5 ar
24 19 Monster cycles to failure 5 Cycles
25 20 Japan Industrial Standards test 5 Binary
26 20 Bending strength (frontal loading) 5 kN

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 6-4 List of metrics for the suspension. The relative importance of each metric and the units for the metric
are also shown. “Subj.” is an abbreviation indicating that a metric is subjective.

A few guidelines should be considered when constructing the list of metrics:

° Metrics should be complete. Ideally each customer need would correspond to a single
metric, and the value of that metric would correlate perfectly with satisfaction of that
need. In practice, several metrics may be necessary to completely reﬂect a single
customer need.

° Metrics should be dependent, not independent, variables. This guideline is a
variant of the what-not-how principle introduced in Chapter 5. As do customer
needs, specifications also indicate what the product must do, but not how theProduct Specifications 97

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

F N ("0 ﬂ' L0 *0 l\ CO 0\ C) F N ("0 ﬂ' L0 *0 l\ CO 0\ C) N ("0 ﬂ' L0 *0
FFFFFFFFF NNNNNNN
N
I C E
9 '3 g
E S‘ g g m
C '_ t’
>— E C
r5 (1) (D ~— a) r5
D U) >— 3 m U Q-
0) x C G) C E C 3—
— ,_ 0 r5 5 o C ‘5 a)
u ‘0 a, E >— u o C D ’5,
n: C 4—1 4—1 44 g 4—1 H— (l) D C
“2 gacﬂ m Ham‘s: w—
(n (l) _ 4—» 3 O _ ._ ,_ m '0
Gt 0 o a) E a) o o L Q r5 0) (D m
E 4.; 2 +’ +1 (I) .2 L t’ E E H O
4—: C m L Q_ 0’ .t’ ’g a) U W —
3 a) o .3 E o. E g m ’5 E a, ‘9 To
0 5 "CT . ’43 a) ‘5 l7; ’— m H— 07 >— ru 4—1
Q_ 4.: (l) m C x L: O 35 (I) (U (l) 3 '0 C
o E E 'T 0’ 9 >‘ U n D \ I) ‘0 = C O
,_ ._ 44 \O L D L O 4—1 E i) (1) (5 (U >—
'O O H C N 4" 4—» 4" z 07 E D 3: O L'— 4—: t
E HEEgv 1'6 5 L 7925 .E‘UEES'HO‘DL
0 WM?» m m +4 is»: SﬁUmQEZEE}
’- -O —3 8 tl: > m m m 07 a) E r5 1;; '0 m ’— ~— (1) C C
”'80ng 0’ (D‘DGC) emo- 33£mfépmw
g?)>pu¥+5tEmé.u—g‘ﬁg€%£agm65>3b
,_ ._ ._ m a) o ._ 3 ‘— o u m
+55%Eséen3ngn~aégvasm.e§:v51ém
3mg3._EOTUETUm3_EH5mEEmymlﬁa—» E
C _ E Q- _ >— _ >— ‘O t (l) _ — (D ’_ (l) (n C
mE’XCE’x‘Dmmm ww’XQUZHQ—muvcmv
tamgmmt‘ua‘aa’gﬁ;“EEV‘EE§E&>°%$
Need <m§§0§nﬁJHJImEEFLEDFUFmDEﬁm
1 Reducesvibration tothe hands 0 O O
2 Allows easy traversal of slow, difficult terrain O
3 Enables high—speed descents on bumpy trails O O O
4 Allows sensitivity adjustment 0
5 Preserves the steering characteristics of the bike 0 O
6 Remains rigid during hard cornering O O
7 Is lightweight O
8 Provides stiff mounting points for the brakes O
9 Fitsawide variety ofbikes, wheels, and tires 0 O O O
10 Is easy to install 0
1 1 Works with fenders O
12 Instills pride 0
13 Is affordable for an amateur enthusiast O
14 Is not contaminated by water 0
15 Is not contaminated by grunge O
16 Can be easily accessed for maintenance 0
17 Allows easy replacement of worn parts 0 O
18 Can be maintained with readily available tools 0
19 Lastsa long time 0 O
20 Is safe in a crash 0 O

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 6-5 The needs-metrics matrix.

specifications will be achieved. Designers use many types of variables in product
development; some are dependent, such as the mass of the fork, and some are inde-
pendent, such as the material used for the fork. In other words, designers cannot
control mass directly because it arises from other independent decisions the design-
ers will make, such as dimensions and materials choices. Metrics specify the over-
all performance of a product and should therefore be the dependent variables (i.e.,
the performance measures or output variables) in the design problem. By using
dependent variables for the specifications, designers are left with the freedom to
achieve the specifications using the best approach possible.98 Chapter 6

° Metrics should be practical. It does not serve the team to devise a metric for a bicycle
suspension that can only be measured by a scientific laboratory at a cost of $100,000.
Ideally, metrics will be directly observable or analyzable properties of the product that
can be easily evaluated by the team.

° Some needs cannot easily be translated into quantifiable metrics. The need that
the suspension instills pride may be quite critical to success in the fashion-conscious
mountain bike market, but how can pride be quantified? In these cases, the team sim-
ply repeats the need statement as a specification and notes that the metric is subjective
and would be evaluated by a panel of customers. (We indicate this by entering “Subj.”
in the units column.)

° The metrics should include the popular criteria for comparison in the marketplace.
Many customers in various markets buy products based on independently published
evaluations. Such evaluations are found, for example, in Popular Science, Consumer
Reports, on various Internet sites, or, in our case, in Bicycling and Mountain Bike
magazines. If the team knows that its product will be evaluated by the trade media
and knows what the evaluation criteria will be, then it should include metrics cor-
responding to these criteria. Mountain Bike magazine uses a test machine called the
Monster, which measures the vertical acceleration (in g’s) of the handlebars as a
bicycle equipped with the fork runs over a block 50 millimeters tall. For this reason,
the team included “maximum value from the Monster” as a metric. If the team cannot
find a relationship between the criteria used by the media and the customer needs it
has identified, then it should ensure that a need has not been overlooked and/or should
work with the media to revise the criteria. In a few cases, the team may conclude that
high performance in the media evaluations is in itself a customer need and choose to
include a metric used by the media that has little intrinsic technical merit.

In addition to denoting the needs related to each metric, Exhibit 6-4 contains
the units of measurement and an importance rating for each metric. The units of
measurement are most commonly conventional engineering units such as kilograms
and seconds. However, some metrics will not lend themselves to numerical values. The
need that the suspension “works with fenders” is best translated into a specification
listing the models of fenders with which the fork is compatible. In this case, the value
of the metric is actually a list of fenders rather than a number. For the metric involving
the standard safety test, the value is pass/fail. (We indicate these two cases by entering
“List” and “Binary” in the units column.)

The importance rating of a metric is derived from the importance ratings of the
needs it reﬂects. For cases in which a metric maps directly to a single need, the
importance rating of the need becomes the importance rating of the metric. For cases
in which a metric is related to more than one need, the importance of the metric is de-
termined by considering the importances of the needs to which it relates and the nature
of these relationships. We believe that there are enough subtleties in this process that
importance weightings can best be determined through discussion among the team
members, rather than through a formal algorithm. When there are relatively few speci-
fications and establishing the relative importance of these specifications is critically
important, conjoint analysis may be useful. Conjoint analysis is described brieﬂy later
in this chapter and publications explaining the technique are referenced at the end of
the chapter.Product Specifications 99

Step 2: Collect Competitive Benchmarking Information

Unless the team expects to enjoy a total monopoly, the relationship of the new product to
competitive products is paramount in determining commercial success. While the team
will have entered the product development process with some idea of how it wishes to
compete in the marketplace, the target specifications are the language the team uses to
discuss and agree on the detailed positioning of its product relative to existing products,
both its own and competitors’. Information on competing products must be gathered to
support these positioning decisions.

An example of a competitive benchmarking chart is shown in Exhibit 6-6. The
columns of the chart correspond to the competitive products and the rows are the metrics
established in step 1. Note that the competitive benchmarking chart can be constructed
as a simple appendage to the spreadsheet containing the list of metrics. (This information
is one of the “rooms” in the House of Quality, described by Hauser and Clausing.)

The benchmarking chart is conceptually very simple. For each competitive product, the
values of the metrics are simply entered down a column. Gathering these data can be very
time consuming, involving (at the least) purchasing, testing, disassembling, and estimat-
ing the production costs of the most important competitive products. However, this invest-
ment of time is essential, as no product development team can expect to succeed without
having this type of information. A word of warning: Sometimes the data contained in
competitors’ catalogs and supporting literature are not accurate. Where possible, values of
the key metrics should be verified by independent testing or observation.

An alternative competitive benchmarking chart can be constructed with rows corre-
sponding to the customer needs and columns corresponding to the competitive products
(see Exhibit 6-7). This chart is used to compare customers’ perceptions of the relative de-
gree to which the products satisfy their needs. Constructing this chart requires collecting
customer perception data, which can also be very expensive and time consuming. Some
techniques for measuring customers’ perceptions of satisfaction of needs are contained
in a book by Urban and Hauser (1993). Both charts can be useful and any discrepancies
between the two are instructive. At a minimum, a chart showing the competitive values of
the metrics (Exhibit 6-6) should be created.

Step 3: Set Ideal and Marginally Acceptable Target Values

In this step, the team synthesizes the available information in order to actually set the
target values for the metrics. Two types of target value are useful: an ideal value and a
marginally acceptable value. The ideal value is the best result the team could hope for.
The marginally acceptable value is the value of the metric that would just barely make the
product commercially viable. Both of these targets are useful in guiding the subsequent
stages of concept generation and concept selection, and for refining the specifications
after the product concept has been selected.
There are five ways to express the values of the metrics:

° At least X: These specifications establish targets for the lower bound on a metric, but
higher is still better. For example, the value of the brake mounting stiffness is specified
to be at least 325 kilonewtons/meter.

° At most X: These specifications establish targets for the upper bound on a metric, with
smaller values being better. For example, the value for the mass of the suspension fork
is set to be at most 1.4 kilograms.100 Chapter 6

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Rox Rox Gunhill
Metric Need ST Maniray Tahx Tahx Tonka Head
No. Nos. Metric Imp. Units Tritrack 2 Quadra Ti 21 Pro Shox
1 1, 3 Attenuation from
dropout to
handlebar at 10 Hz 3 dB 8 15 10 15 9 13
2 2, 6 Spring preload 3 N 550 760 500 710 480 680
3 1, 3 Maximum value
from the Monster 5 g 3.6 3.2 3.7 3.3 3.7 3.4
4 1, 3 Minimum descent
time on test track 5 s 13 11.3 12.6 11.2 13.2 11
5 4 Damping coefficient
adjustment range 3 N—s/m 0 0 0 200 0 0
6 5 Maximum travel
(26—in. wheel) 3 mm 28 48 43 46 33 38
7 5 Rake offset 3 mm 41.5 39 38 38 43.2 39
8 6 Lateral stiffness
at the tip 3 kN/m 59 110 85 85 65 130
9 7 Total mass 4 kg 1.409 1.385 1.409 1.364 1.222 1.100
10 8 Lateral stiffness
at brake pivots 2 kN/m 295 550 425 425 325 650
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.125 1.000 1.125 1.000
11 9 Headset sizes 5 In 1.125 1.250 1.125 1.250 1.125 NA
150 150
180 140 150 170 150
210 165 170 190 190
230 190 190 210 210
12 9 Steertube length 5 mm 255 215 210 230 220 NA
26 in.
13 9 Wheel sizes 5 List 26 in. 26 in. 26 in. 700C 26 in. 26 in.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 6-6 Competitive benchmarking chart based on metrics.

° Between X and Y: These specifications establish both upper and lower bounds for the value
of a metric. For example, the value for the spring preload is set to be between 480 and 800
newtons. Any more and the suspension is harsh; any less and the suspension is too bouncy.

° Exactly X: These specifications establish a target of a particular value of a metric, with
any deviation degrading performance. For example, the ideal value for the rake offset
metric is set to 38 millimeters. This type of specification is to be avoided if possible
because such specifications substantially constrain the design. Often, upon reconsid-
eration, the team realizes that what initially appears as an “exactly X” specification
can be expressed as a “between X and Y” specification.

° A set of discrete values: Some metrics will have values corresponding to several discrete
choices. For example, the headset diameters are 1.000, 1.125, or 1.250 inches. (Industry
practice is to use English units for these and several other critical bicycle dimensions.)Product Speczfications 101

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Rox Rox Gunhill
Metric Need ST Maniray Tahx Tahx Tonka Head
No. Nos. Metric Imp. Units Tritrack 2 Quadra Ti 21 Pro Shox

14 9 Maximum tire width 5 in. 1.5 1.75 1.5 1.75 1.5 1.5
15 10 Time to assemble

to frame 1 s 35 35 45 45 35 85
16 11 Fender compatibility 1 List Zefal None None None None All
17 12 Instills pride 5 Subj. 1 4 3 5 3 5
18 13 Unit manufacturing

cost 5 US$ 65 105 85 115 80 100
19 14 Time in spray

chamber without

water entry 5 s 1300 2900 >3600 >3600 2300 >3600
20 15 Cycles in mud

chamber without

contamination 5 k—cycles 15 19 15 25 18 35
21 16,17 Time to disassemble/

assemble for

maintenance 3 s 160 245 215 245 200 425
22 17, 18 Special tools 3 List Hex Hex Hex Hex Long Hex,

required for hex pin

maintenance wrench
23 19 UV test duration to

degrade rubber parts 5 hr 400+ 250 400+ 400+ 400+ 250
24 19 Monster cycles to

failure 5 Cycles 500k+ 500k+ 500k+ 480l< 500k+ 330k
25 20 Japan Industrial

Standards test 5 Binary Pass Pass Pass Pass Pass Pass
26 20 Bending strength

(frontal loading) 5 kN 5.5 8.9 7.5 7.5 6.2 10.2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 6-6 Continued

The desirable range of values for one metric may depend on another. In other words,
we may wish to express a target as, for example, “the fork tip lateral stiffness is no more
than 20 percent of the lateral stiffness at the brake pivots.” In applications where the team
feels this level of complexity is warranted, such targets can easily be included, although
we recommend that this level of complexity not be introduced until the final phase of the
specifications process.

Using these five different types of expressions for values of the metrics, the team sets
the target specifications. The team simply proceeds down the list of metrics and assigns
both the marginally acceptable and ideal target values for each metric. These decisions are
facilitated by the metric-based competitive benchmarking chart shown in Exhibit 6-6. To
set the target values, the team has many considerations, including the capability of com-
peting products available at the time, competitors’ future product capabilities (if these are
predictable), and the product’s mission statement and target market segment. Exhibit 6-8
shows the targets assigned for the suspension fork.102 Chapter 6

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ST Maniray Rox Tahx Rox Tahx Tonka Gunhill
No. Need Imp. Tritrack 2 Quadra Ti 21 Pro Head Shox
1 Reduces vibration to the
hands 3 o I... on on... no on.
2 Allows easy traversal of
SlOW, difficult terrain 2 on too- 000 on... so. so...
3 Enables high—speed
descents on bumpy trails 5 . "no -- un- u on
4 Allows sensitivity
adjustment 3 o I... I. II... I. on.
5 3reserves the steering
characteristics of the bike 4 "0- n o on non no"
6 Qemains rigid during
Ward Cornering 4 I II. I II... I II...
7 s lightweight 4 o oo- o on. I... II...
8 Drovides stiff mounting
points for the brakes 2 . "n on on un- .-
9 :its a wide variety of
bikes, wheels, and tires 5 I... on... on. on... on. o
10 s easy to install ‘I I... II... I... I... II... o
11 Works with fenders 1 "- I I o - un-
12 nstills pride 5 o I... on. 00.0. on. 0....
13 satfordable for an
amateur enthusiast 5 "no . on o u. ..
14 s not contaminated
by water 5 o on. I... I... I. II...
15 s not contaminated
by grunge 5 I II. I I... I. II...
16 Can be easily accessed
lor maintenance 3 I... II... I... I... II... I
17 Allows easy replacement
of Worn parts 1 I... II... I... I... II... I
18 Can be maintained with
readily available tools 3 to... II... on... no... I. o
19 Lasts a long time 5 II... II... II... II. II... I
20 is Safe in a Crash 5 II... II... II... II... II... II...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 6-7 Competitive benchmarking chart based on perceived satisfaction of needs. (Scoring more “dots”
corresponds to greater perceived satisfaction of the need.)Product Specifications 1 03

Because most of the values are expressed in terms of bounds (upper or lower or both),
the team is establishing the boundaries of the competitively viable product space. The
team hopes that the product will meet some of the ideal targets but is confident that a
product can be commercially viable even if it exhibits one or more marginally acceptable
characteristics. Note that these specifications are preliminary because until a product con-
cept is chosen and some of the design details are worked out, many of the exact trade-offs
are uncertain.

Step 4: Reflect on the Results and the Process

The team may require some iteration to agree on the targets. Reﬂection after each
iteration helps to ensure that the results are consistent with the goals of the project.
Questions to consider include:

0 Are members of the team “gaming”? For example, is the key marketing representative
insisting that an aggressive value is required for a particular metric in the hopes that
by setting a high goal, the team will actually achieve more than if his or her true, and
more lenient, beliefs were expressed?

° Should the team consider offering multiple products or at least multiple options for the
product in order to best match the particular needs of more than one market segment,
or will one “average” product suffice?

0 Are any specifications missing? Do the specifications reﬂect the characteristics that
will dictate commercial success?

Once the targets have been set, the team can proceed to generate solution concepts.
The target specifications then can be used to help the team select a concept and will
help the team know when a concept is commercially viable. (See Chapter 7, Concept
Generation, and Chapter 8, Concept Selection.)

Setting the Final Specifications

As the team finalizes the choice of a concept and prepares for subsequent design
and development, the specifications are revisited. Specifications that originally were
only targets expressed as broad ranges of values are now refined and made more
precise.

Finalizing the specifications is difficult because of trade-offs—inverse relationships
between two specifications that are inherent in the selected product concept. Trade-offs
frequently occur between different technical performance metrics and almost always occur
between technical performance metrics and cost. For example, one trade-off is between
brake mounting stiffness and mass of the fork. Because of the basic mechanics of the fork
structure, these specifications are inversely related, assuming other factors are held con-
stant. Another trade-off is between cost and mass. For a given concept, the team may be
able to reduce the mass of the fork by making some parts out of titanium instead of steel.
Unfortunately, decreasing the mass in this way will most likely increase the manufactur-
ing cost of the product. The difficult part of refining the specifications is choosing how
such trade-offs will be resolved.104 Chapter 6

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Metric Need Marginal Ideal
No. Nos. Metric Imp. Units Value Value
1 1, 3 Attenuation from dropout to handlebar
at 10 Hz 3 dB >10 >15
2 2, 6 Spring preload 3 N 480—800 650—700
3 1, 3 Maximum value from the Monster 5 9 <3.5 <32
4 1, 3 Minimum descent time on test track 5 s <13.0 <11.0
5 4 Damping coefficient adjustment range 3 N—s/m 0 >200
6 5 Maximum travel (26—in. wheel) 3 mm 33—50 45
7 5 Rake offset 3 mm 37—45 38
8 6 Lateral stiffness at the tip 3 kN/m >65 >130
9 7 Total mass 4 kg <1.4 <1.1
1O 8 Lateral stiffness at brake pivots 2 kN/m >325 >650
1.000
1.000 1.125
11 9 Headset sizes 5 in. 1.125 1.250
150
150 170
170 190
190 210
12 9 Steertube length 5 mm 210 230
26 in.
13 9 Wheel sizes 5 List 26 in. 700C
14 9 Maximum tire width 5 in. >15 >1.75
15 10 Time to assemble to frame 1 s <60 <35
16 11 Fender compatibility 1 List None All
17 12 Instills pride 5 Subj. >3 >5
18 13 Unit manufacturing cost 5 US$ <85 <65
19 14 Time in spray chamber without water 5 s >23OO >36OO
entry
20 15 Cycles in mud chamber without 5 k—cycles >15 >35
contamination
21 16, 17 Time to disassemble/assemble 3 s <3OO <16O
for maintenance
22 17, 18 Special tools required for maintenance 3 List Hex Hex
23 19 UV test duration to degrade rubber parts 5 hr >250 >450
24 19 Monster cycles to failure 5 Cycles >300k >500k
25 20 Japan Industrial Standards test 5 Binary Pass Pass
26 20 Bending strength (frontal loading) 5 kN >7.0 >10.0

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 6-8 The target specifications. Like the other information systems, this one is easily encoded
with a spreadsheet as a simple extension to the list of specifications.Product Specifications 1 05

Here, we propose a five-step process:

Develop technical models of the product.

Develop a cost model of the product.

Refine the specifications, making trade-offs where necessary.
Flow down the specifications as appropriate.

9:59P)?

Reﬂect on the results and the process.

Step 1: Develop Technical Models of the Product

A technical model of the product is a tool for predicting the values of the metrics for a
particular set of design decisions. We intend the term models to refer to both analytical
and physical approximations of the product. (See Chapter 14, Prototyping, for further dis-
cussion of such models.)

At this point, the team had chosen an oil-damped coil spring concept for the suspen-
sion fork. The design decisions facing the team included details such as the materials for
the structural components, the orifice diameter and oil viscosity for the damper, and the
spring constant. Three models linking such design decisions to the performance metrics
are shown in conceptual form in Exhibit 6-9. Such models can be used to predict the
product’s performance along a number of dimensions. The inputs to these models are the
independent design variables associated with the product concept, such as oil viscosity,
orifice diameter, spring constant, and geometry. The outputs of the model are the values
of the metrics, such as attenuation, stiffness, and fatigue life.

Ideally, the team will be able to accurately model the product analytically, perhaps
by implementing the model equations in a spreadsheet or computer simulation. Such a
model allows the team to predict rapidly what type of performance can be expected from
a particular choice of design variables, without costly physical experimentation. In most
cases, such analytical models will be available for only a small subset of the metrics. For
example, the team was able to model attenuation analytically, based on the engineers’
knowledge of dynamic systems.

Several independent models, each corresponding to a subset of the metrics, may be
more manageable than one large integrated model. For example, the team developed
a separate analytical model for the brake mounting stiffness that was completely
independent of the dynamic model used to predict vibration attenuation. In some cases,
no analytical models will be available at all. For example, the team was not able to model
analytically the fatigue performance of the suspension, so physical models were built and
tested. It is generally necessary to actually build a variety of different physical mock-ups
or prototypes in order to explore the implications of several combinations of design
variables. To reduce the number of models that must be constructed, it is useful to
employ design-of—experiments (DOE) techniques, which can minimize the number of
experiments required to explore the design space. (See Chapter 15, Robust Design, for a
summary of DOE methods.)

Armed with these technical models, the team can predict whether any particular set
of specifications (such as the ideal target values) is technically feasible by exploring
different combinations of design variables. This type of modeling and analysis prevents
the team from setting a combination of specifications that cannot be achieved using the
available latitude in the product concept.106 Chapter 6

Suspended Mass
Unsprung Mass
Orifice Diameter
Spring Constant

Oil Viscosity

Support Geometry
Material Properties
Tube Geometry

Mounting Points

Fork Geometry
Material Properties
Fastening Methods

Suspension Geometry

 

 

 

 

 

 

—>
Dynamic Model of > Attenuation at 10 Hz
—> Suspension Performance
—> (Analytical) —> Estimated Monster g's
—>
—>
—> Static Model of _
Brake Mounting Stiffness —> Lateral Stiffness
—> .
(Analytical)
—>
—>
—> Fatigue Model of _
Suspension Durability ‘—> CVCIGS to Failure
(Physical)
—>

Design Variables
(Model Inputs)

 

 

 

Metrics
(Model Outputs)

EXHIBIT 6-9 Models used to assess technical feasibility. Technical models may be analytical or physical
approximations of the product concept.

Note that a technical model is almost always unique to a particular product concept.

One of the models illustrated in Exhibit 6-9 is for an oil-damped suspension system;
the model would be substantially different if the team had selected a concept employing
a rubber suspension element. Thus, the modeling step can only be performed after the
concept has been chosen.

Step 2: Develop a Cost Model of the Product

The goal of this step of the process is to make sure that the product can be produced at
the target cost. The target cost is the manufacturing cost at which the company and its
distribution partners can make adequate profits while still offering the product to the end
customer at a competitive price. The appendix to this chapter provides an explanation of
target costing. It is at this point that the team attempts to discover, for example, how much
it will have to sacrifice in manufacturing cost to save 50 grams of mass.

For most products, the first estimates of manufacturing costs are completed by draft-
ing a bill of materials (a list of all the parts) and estimating a purchase price or fabrication
cost for each part. At this point in the development process the team does not generally
know all of the components that will be in the product, but the team nevertheless makes
an attempt to list the components it expects will be required. While early estimates gen-
erally focus on the cost of components, the team will usually make a rough estimate of
assembly and other manufacturing costs (e.g., overhead) at this point as well. Efforts to
develop these early cost estimates involve soliciting cost estimates from vendors and
estimating the production costs of the components the firm will make itself. This processProduct Specifications 1 07

 

 

 

Qty/ High Low High Total Low Total
Component Fork (5 ea.) (5 ea.) ($/fork) ($/fork)
Steertube 1 2.50 2.00 2.50 2.00
Crown 1 4.00 3.00 4.00 3.00
Boot 2 1.00 0.75 2.00 1.50
Lower tube 2 3.00 2.00 6.00 4.00
Lower tube top cover 2 2.00 1.50 4.00 3.00
Main lip seal 2 1.50 1.40 3.00 2.80
Slide bushing 4 0.20 0.18 0.80 0.72
Slide bushing spacer 2 0.50 0.40 1.00 0.80
Lower tube plug 2 0.50 0.35 1.00 0.70
Upper tube 2 5.50 4.00 11.00 8.00
Upper tube top cap 2 3.00 2.50 6.00 5.00
Upper tube adjustment knob 2 2.00 1.75 4.00 3.50
Adjustment shaft 2 4.00 3.00 8.00 6.00
Spring 2 3.00 2.50 6.00 5.00
Upper tube orifice cap 1 3.00 2.25 3.00 2.25
Orifice springs 4 0.50 0.40 2.00 1.60
Brake studs 2 0.40 0.35 0.80 0.70
Brake brace bolt 2 0.25 0.20 0.50 0.40
Brake brace 1 5.00 3.50 5.00 3.50
Oil (liters) 0.1 2.50 2.00 0.25 0.20
Misc. snap rings, o—rings 10 0.15 0.10 1.50 1.00
Decals 4 0.25 0.15 1.00 0.60
Assembly at $20/hr 30 min 20 min 10.00 6.67
Overhead at 25% of direct cost 20.84 15.74
Total $104.19 $78.68

 

EXHIBIT 6-1 0 A bill of materials with cost estimates. This simple cost model allows early cost estimates to
facilitate realistic trade-offs in the product specifications.

is often facilitated by a purchasing expert and a production engineer. A bill-of—materials
cost model is shown in Exhibit 6-10 for the suspension fork. (See Chapter 13, Design for
Manufacturing, for more details on estimating manufacturing cost.)

A useful way to record cost information is to list figures for the high and low es-
timates of each item. This helps the team to understand the range of uncertainty in
the estimates. The bill of materials is typically used iteratively: the team performs a
“what-if” cost analysis for a set of design decisions and then revises these decisions
based on what it learns. The bill of materials is itself a kind of performance model,
but instead of predicting the value of a technical performance metric, it predicts cost
performance. The bill of materials remains useful throughout the development process
and is updated regularly (as frequently as once each week) to reﬂect the current status
of the estimated manufacturing cost.

At this point in the development process, teams developing complex products contain-
ing hundreds or thousands of parts will not generally be able to include every part in the
bill of materials. Instead, the team will list the major components and subsystems and
place bounds on their costs based on past experience or on the judgment of suppliers.108 Chapter 6

120 —

110

100

(O
O

 

80

70

Estimated Manufacturing Cost, $

60

50
3.0

   
  
   
   
  

Ideal Values

Step 3: Refine the Specifications, Making Trade-Offs
Where Necessary

Once the team has constructed technical performance models where possible and
constructed a preliminary cost model, these tools can be used to develop final specifica-
tions. Finalizing specifications can be accomplished in a group session in which feasible
combinations of values are determined through the use of the technical models and then
the cost implications are explored. In an iterative fashion, the team converges on the
specifications that will most favorably position the product relative to the competition,
will best satisfy the customer needs, and will ensure adequate profits.

One important tool for supporting this decision-making process is the competitive map.
An example competitive map is shown in Exhibit 6-11. This map is simply a scatter plot
of the competitive products along two dimensions selected from the set of metrics and is
sometimes called a trade-off map. The map displayed in Exhibit 6-11 shows estimated
manufacturing cost versus score on the Monster test. The regions defined by the marginal
and ideal values of the specifications are shown on the map. This map is particularly
useful in showing that all of the high-performance suspensions (low Monster scores) have
high estimated manufacturing costs. Armed with technical performance models and a cost
model, the team can assess whether or not it will be able to “beat the trade-off” exhibited
in the competitive map.

O RoxTathi 21

O Maniray 2
OGunhiII Head Shox

O RoxTahx Ouadra

MarginalValues O Tonka Pro

"""" O STTritrack

Trade-Off Curve—for Concept A

 
   

Trade-Off Curve for Concept B
| | | |
3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0

Score on Monster (g's)

 

EXHIBIT 6-1 1 A competitive map showing estimated manufacturing cost versus score on the Monster test.
Trade-off curves for two suspension concepts are also drawn on this map.Product Specifications 1 09

These maps can be constructed directly from the data contained in the competitive
benchmarking chart using the plotting feature of the spreadsheet software. Generally the
team will prepare three or four such maps corresponding to a handful of critical metrics.
Additional maps may be created as needed to support subsequent decision making.

The competitive map is used to position the new product relative to the competition.
Trade-off curves, showing performance of the product concept for a range of design
variables, can be drawn directly on the competitive map, as shown in Exhibit 6-11.
Using the technical and cost models of the product and the competitive maps, the team
can refine the specifications in order to both satisfy the inherent constraints of the prod-
uct concept and make the trade-offs in a way that will provide a performance advantage
relative to the competitive products. The final specifications for the suspension fork are
shown in Exhibit 6-12.

For relatively mature product categories in which competition is based on performance
relative to a handful of well-understood performance metrics, conjoint analysis may be
useful in refining product specifications. Conjoint analysis uses customer survey data
to construct a model of customer preference. Essentially each respondent in a sample of
potential customers is repeatedly asked to evaluate hypothetical products characterized by
a set of attributes. These attributes must generally be metrics that are easily understood by
customers (e.g., fuel economy and price for automobiles). Subjective attributes (e.g., styl-
ing) can be represented graphically. The hypothetical products are constructed using the
statistical techniques of experimental design. Using customer responses, conjoint analysis
infers the relative importance of each attribute to the customer. These data can then be
used to predict which product a customer would choose when offered a hypothetical set
of alternatives. By using these predictions for all of the customers in a sample, the market
share of each product in the set of alternatives can be forecast. Using this approach, the
specification values that maximize market share can be estimated. The details of conjoint
analysis are fairly straightforward, but beyond the scope of this chapter. Relevant refer-
ences are listed at the end of the chapter.

Step 4: Flow Down the Specifications as Appropriate

This chapter focuses on the specifications for a relatively simple component designed by a
single, relatively small development team. Establishing specifications takes on additional
importance and is substantially more challenging when developing a highly complex
product consisting of multiple subsystems designed by multiple development teams. In
such a context, specifications are used to define the development objectives of each of the
subsystems as well as for the product as a whole. The challenge in this case is to ﬂow down
the overall specifications to specifications for each subsystem. For example, the overall
specifications for an automobile contain metrics like fuel economy, 0—100 kilometer/
hour acceleration time, and turning radius. However, specifications must also be cre-
ated for the several dozen major subsystems that make up the automobile, including
the body, engine, transmission, braking system, and suspension. The specifications for
the engine include metrics like peak power, peak torque, and fuel consumption at peak
efficiency. One challenge in the ﬂow-down process is to ensure that the subsystem
specifications in fact reﬂect the overall product specifications—that if specifications for
the subsystems are achieved, the overall product specifications will be achieved. A second
challenge is to ensure that certain specifications for different subsystems are equally1 10 Chapter 6

EXHIBIT 6-1 2
The final
specifications.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

No. Metric Unit Value
1 Attenuation from dropout to handlebar at 10 Hz dB> 12
2 Spring preload N 600—650
3 Maximum value from the Monster g <3.4
4 Minimum descent time on test track s <11.5
5 Damping coefficient adjustment range N-s/m >100
6 Maximum travel (26—in. wheel) mm 43
7 Rake offset mm 38
8 Lateral stiffness at the tip kN/m >75
9 Total mass kg <14
10 Lateral stiffness at brake pivots kN/m >425
1.000
11 Headset sizes in. 1.125
150
170
190
210
12 Steertube length mm 230
13 Wheel sizes List 26 in.
14 Maximum tire width in. >1.75
15 Time to assemble to frame s <45
16 Fender compatibility _ist Zefal
17 Instills pride Subj. >4
18 Unit manufacturing cost JS$ <80
19 Time in spray chamber without water entry s >3600
20 Cycles in mud chamber without contamination —cycles >25
21 Time to disassemble/assemble for maintenance s <200
22 Special tools required for maintenance _ist Hex
23 UV test duration to degrade rubber parts "1r >450
24 Monster cycles to failure Cycles >500k
25 Japan Industrial Standards test Binary Pass
26 Bending strength (frontal loading) kN >10.0

 

difficult to meet. That is, for example, that the mass specification for the engine is not
inordinately more difficult to meet than is the mass specification for the body. Otherwise,
the cost of the product will likely be higher than necessary.

Some overall component specifications can be established through budget allocations.
For example, specifications for manufacturing cost, mass, and power consumption can be
allocated to subsystems with the confidence that the overall cost, mass, and power con-
sumption of the product will simply be the sum of these quantities for each subsystem.Product Specifications 1 1 1

To some extent, geometric volume can be allocated this way as well. Other component
specifications must be established through a more complex understanding of how subsys-
tem performance relates to overall product performance. For example, fuel efficiency is
a relatively complex function of vehicle mass, rolling resistance, aerodynamic drag coef-
ficient, frontal area, and engine efficiency. Establishing specifications for the body, tires,
and engine requires a model of how these variables relate to overall fuel efficiency.

A comprehensive treatment of ﬂowing down specifications for complex products is
beyond the scope of this chapter, and in fact is a major focus of the field of systems engi-
neering. We refer the reader to several useful books on this subject in the reference list.

Step 5: Reflect on the Results and the Process

As always, the final step in the method is to reﬂect on the outcome and the process. Some
questions the team may want to consider are:

° Is the product a winner? The product concept should allow the team to actually set the
specifications so that the product will meet the customer needs and excel competi-
tively. If not, then the team should return to the concept generation and selection phase
or abandon the project.

0 How much uncertainty is there in the technical and cost models? If competitive suc-
cess is dictated by metrics around which much uncertainty remains, the team may wish
to refine the technical or cost models in order to increase confidence in meeting the
specifications.

° Is the concept chosen by the team best suited to the target market, or could it be best
applied in another market (say, the low end or high end instead of the middle)? The
selected concept may actually be too good. If the team has generated a concept that is
dramatically superior to the competitive products, it may wish to consider employing
the concept in a more demanding, and potentially more profitable, market segment.

0 Should the firm initiate a formal effort to develop better technical models of some
aspect of the product’s performance for future use? Sometimes the team will discover
that it does not really understand the underlying product technology well enough to
create useful performance models. In such circumstances, an engineering effort to
develop better understanding and models may be useful in subsequent development
pI‘OJCCtS.

 

Summary

Customer needs are generally expressed in the “language of the customer.” In order to
provide specific guidance about how to design and engineer a product, development
teams establish a set of specifications, which spell out in precise, measurable detail what
the product has to do to be commercially successful. The specifications must reﬂect the
customer needs, differentiate the product from the competitive products, and be techni-
cally and economically realizable.

° Specifications are typically established at least twice. Immediately after identifying the
customer needs, the team sets target specifications. After concept selection and testing,
the team develops ﬁnal specifications.1 1 2 Chapter 6

Target specifications represent the hopes and aspirations of the team, but they are es-
tablished before the team knows the constraints the product technology will place on
what can be achieved. The team’s efforts may fail to meet some of these specifications
and may exceed others, depending on the details of the product concept the team even-
tually selects.

The process of establishing the target specifications entails four steps:

1. Prepare the list of metrics.

2. Collect competitive benchmarking information.
3. Set ideal and marginally acceptable target values.
4. Reﬂect on the results and the process.

Final specifications are developed by assessing the actual technological constraints and
the expected production costs using analytical and physical models. During this refine-
ment phase the team must make difficult trade-offs among various desirable character-
istics of the product.

The five-step process for refining the specifications is:

1. Develop technical models of the product.

2. Develop a cost model of the product.

3. Refine the specifications, making trade-offs where necessary.
4. Flow down the specifications as appropriate.

5. Reﬂect on the results and the process.

The specifications process is facilitated by several simple information systems that
can easily be created using conventional spreadsheet software. Tools such as the list of
metrics, the needs-metrics matrix, the competitive benchmarking charts, and the com-
petitive maps all support the team’s decision making by providing the team with a way
to represent and discuss the specifications.

Because of the need to utilize the best possible knowledge of the market, the custom-
ers, the core product technology, and the cost implications of design alternatives, the
specifications process requires active participation from team members representing
the marketing, design, and manufacturing functions of the enterprise.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

The process of translating customer needs into a set of specifications is also accomplished
by the Quality Function Deployment (QFD) method. The key ideas behind QFD and the
House of Quality are clearly presented by Hauser and Clausing in a popular article.

Hauser, John, and Don Clausing, “The House of Quality,” Harvard Business Review,
Vol. 66, No. 3, May—June 1988, pp. 63—73.

Urban and Hauser present several techniques for selecting combinations of product
attributes in order to maximize customer satisfaction. Some of these techniques can serve
as powerful analytical support for the general method described in this chapter.Product Specifications 1 1 3

Urban, Glen, and John Hauser, Design and Marketing of New Products, second
edition, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1993.

Ramaswamy and Ulrich treat the use of engineering models in setting specifications in
detail. They also identify some of the weaknesses in the conventional House of Quality
method.
Ramaswamy, Raj an, and Karl Ulrich, “Augmenting the House of Quality with
Engineering Models,” Research in Engineering Design, Vol. 5, 1994, pp. 70—79.

Most marketing research textbooks discuss conjoint analysis. Here are two references.
Aaker, David A., V Kumar, and George S. Day, Marketing Research, sixth edition,
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1997.

ConjointAnalysis: A Guide for Designing and Interpreting Conjoint Studies,
American Marketing Association, June 1992.

Systems engineering and the ﬂow down of specifications are treated comprehensively in
the following books.
Hatley, Derek 1., and Imtiaz A. Pirbhai, Strategies for Real-Time System
Specification, Dorset House, New York, 1998.

Rechtin, Eberhardt, and Mark W. Maier, T he Art of Systems Architecting, second
edition, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2000.

More detail on the use of target costing is available in this article by Cooper and Slagmulder.
Cooper, Robin, and Regine Slagmulder, “Develop Profitable New Products with
Target Costing,” Sloan Management Review, Vol. 40, No. 4, Summer 1999, pp. 23—33.

Exercises

1. List a set of metrics corresponding to the need that a pen write smoothly.

2. Devise a metric and a corresponding test for the need that a roofing material last many
years.

3. Some of the same metrics seem to be involved in trade-offs for many different prod-
ucts. What are some examples of such metrics?

Thought Questions

1. How might you establish precise and measurable specifications for intangible needs
such as “the front suspension looks great”?

2. Why are some customer needs difficult to map to a single metric?

3. How might you explain a situation in which customers’ perceptions of the competitive
products (as in Exhibit 6-7) are not consistent with the values of the metrics for those
same products (as in Exhibit 6-6)?

4. Can poor performance relative to one specification always be compensated for by high
performance on other specifications? If so, how can there ever really be a “marginally
acceptable” value for a metric?

5. Why should independent design variables not be used as metrics?1 14 Chapter 6

Appendix

 

Target Costing

Target costing is a simple idea: set the value of the manufacturing cost specification based
on the price the company hopes the end user will pay for the product and on the profit
margins that are required for each stage in the distribution channel. For example, assume
Specialized wishes to sell its suspension fork to its customers through bicycle shops. If
the price it expected the customer to pay was $250 and if bicycle shops normally expect a
gross profit margin of 45 percent on components, then Specialized would have to sell its
fork to bicycle shops for (1 — 0.45) - 250 = $137.50. If Specialized wishes to earn a gross
margin of at least 40 percent on its components, then its unit manufacturing cost must be
less than (1 — 0.40) ' 137.50 = $82.50.

Target costing is the reverse of the cost-plus approach to pricing. The cost-plus ap-
proach begins with what the firm expects its manufacturing costs to be and then sets its
prices by adding its expected profit margin to the cost. This approach ignores the realities
of competitive markets, in which prices are driven by market and customer factors. Target
costing is a mechanism for ensuring that specifications are set in a way that allows the
product to be competitively priced in the marketplace.

Some products are sold directly by a manufacturer to end users of the product. Fre-
quently, products are distributed through one or more intermediate stages, such as dis-
tributors and retailers. Exhibit 6-13 provides some approximate values of gross profit
margins for different product categories.

Let M be the gross profit margin of a stage in the distribution channel.

(P-C)
P

M:

where P is the price this stage charges its customers and C is the cost this stage pays
for the product it sells. (Note that mark-up is similar to margin, but is defined slightly
differently as P/C — 1, so that a margin of 50 percent is equivalent to a mark-up of 100
percent.)

Target cost, C, is given by the following expression:

C = P l'I(1— Mi)
izl

where P is the price paid by the end user, n is the number of stages in the distribution
channel, and M is the margin of the ith stage.

EXAMPLE

Assume the end user price, P, equals $250.
If the product is sold directly to the end user by the manufacturer, and the desired gross
profit margin of the manufacturer, Mm, equals 0.40, then the target cost is

C: P(1—M,,,)= $250 (1 — 0.40) = $150Product Specifications 1 1 5

Manufacturers
Automobiles

Computers

Appliances

Consumer electronics
Sporting goods
Industrial equipment
Medical devices

Toys

Branded packaged goods

Consumer software

Wholesalers/Distributors

Computers

Branded packaged goods

Industrial products—materials, supplies
Industrial products—equipment

Medical devices

Independent Sales Representatives
Sporting goods

Industrial products

Toys

Gifts and novelties

Retailers
Automobile dealers
Electronics

Mass merchandisers
Department stores

Specialty retailers

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mail order

 

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Percent

_Price — Cost—
Price

 

 

Gross Margin

EXHIBIT 6-1 3 Approximate margins for manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, sales representatives, and
retailers. Note that these values are quite approximate. Actual margins depend on many idiosyncratic factors, including
competitive intensity, the volume of units sold, and the level of customer support required. Sales representatives are paid
by commission and are not strictly part of the distribution channel. However, the team may Wish to account for
commissions in its analysis of target cost.1 16 Chapter 6

If the product is sold through a retailer, and the desired gross profit margin for the re-
tailer, Mr, equals 0.45, then

C= P(1—Mm)(1—Mr)
= $250 (1 — 0.40)(1— 0.45) = $82.50

If the product is sold through a distributor and a retailer, and the desired gross profit
margin for the distributor, Md, equals 0.20, then

C = P(1 — Mm)(1 — Md)(1 — M,) = $250 (1 — 0.40)(1 — 0.20)(1 — 0.45) = $66.00CHAPTER SEVEN

Concept Generation

 

Courtesy of The Stanley Works

EXHIBIT 7-1

A cordless electric roofing nailer.

1171 1 8 Chapter 7

The president of Stanley-Bostitch commissioned a team to develop a new handheld
nailer for the roofing market. The product that eventually resulted from the effort is
shown in Exhibit 7-1. The mission of the team was to consider broadly alternative product
concepts, assuming only that the tool would employ conventional nails as the basic fasten-
ing technology. After identifying a set of customer needs and establishing target product
specifications, the team faced the following questions:

0 What existing solution concepts, if any, could be successfully adapted for this application?
0 What new concepts might satisfy the established needs and specifications?
° What methods can be used to facilitate the concept generation process?

The Activity of Concept Generation

A product concept is an approximate description of the technology, working principles, and
form of the product. It is a concise description of how the product will satisfy the customer
needs. A concept is usually expressed as a sketch or as a rough three-dimensional model
and is often accompanied by a brief textual description. The degree to which a product
satisfies customers and can be successfully commercialized depends to a large measure on
the quality of the underlying concept. A good concept is sometimes poorly implemented in
subsequent development phases, but a poor concept can rarely be manipulated to achieve
commercial success. Fortunately, concept generation is relatively inexpensive and can be
done relatively quickly in comparison to the rest of the development process. For example,
concept generation had typically consumed less than 5 percent of the budget and 15 per-
cent of the development time in previous nailer development efforts. Because the concept
generation activity is not costly, there is no excuse for a lack of diligence and care in ex-
ecuting a sound concept generation method.

The concept generation process begins with a set of customer needs and target speci-
fications and results in a set of product concepts from which the team will make a final
selection. The relation of concept generation to the other concept development activities
is shown in Exhibit 7-2. In most cases, an effective development team will generate hun-
dreds of concepts, of which 5 to 20 will merit serious consideration during the concept
selection activity.

 

Mission
Statement

—>

 

 

 

 

 
     

4-. 4-. 4-. 4-. 4-. 4-. 4--
I I I I I I I
' ' ' ' ' ' Development
Identify Establish Generate Select Test Set Plan Plan
Customer —> Target Product Product —> Product —> Final —> Downstream —>
Needs Specifications Concepts Concept(s) Concept(s) Specifications Development

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

Perform Economic Analysis
Benchmark Competitive Products

Build andTest Models and Prototypes

EXHIBIT 7-2 Concept generation is an integral part of the concept development phase.Concept Generation 1 19

Good concept generation leaves the team with confidence that the full space of alter-
natives has been explored. Thorough exploration of alternatives early in the development
process greatly reduces the likelihood that the team will stumble upon a superior concept
late in the development process or that a competitor will introduce a product with dra-
matically better performance than the product under development.

Structured Approaches Reduce the Likelihood
of Costly Problems

Common dysfunctions exhibited by development teams during concept generation include:

° Consideration of only one or two alternatives, often proposed by the most assertive
members of the team.

° Failure to consider carefully the usefulness of concepts employed by other firms in re-
lated and unrelated products.

0 Involvement of only one or two people in the process, resulting in lack of confidence
and commitment by the rest of the team.

0 Ineffective integration of promising partial solutions.
0 Failure to consider entire categories of solutions.

A structured approach to concept generation reduces the incidence of these problems
by encouraging the gathering of information from many disparate information sources, by
guiding the team in the thorough exploration of alternatives, and by providing a mecha-
nism for integrating partial solutions. A structured method also provides a step-by-step
procedure for those members of the team who may be less experienced in design-intensive
activities, allowing them to participate actively in the process.

A Five-Step Method

This chapter presents a five-step concept generation method. The method, outlined in
Exhibit 7-3, breaks a complex problem into simpler subproblems. Solution concepts are
then identified for the subproblems by external and internal search procedures. Classifi-
cation trees and concept combination tables are then used to systematically explore the
space of solution concepts and to integrate the subproblem solutions into a total solution.
Finally, the team takes a step back to reﬂect on the validity and applicability of the results,
as well as on the process used.

This chapter will follow the recommended method and will describe each of the five
steps in detail. Although we present the method in a linear sequence, concept generation
is almost always iterative. Like our other development methods, these steps are intended
to be a baseline from which product development teams can develop and refine their own
unique problem-solving style.

Our presentation of the method is focused primarily on the overall concept for a new
product; however, the method can and should be used at several different points in the
development process. The process is useful not only for overall product concepts but also
for concepts for subsystems and specific components as well. Also note that while the ex-
ample in this chapter involves a relatively technical product, the same basic approach can
be applied to nearly any product.1 20 Chapter 7

EXHIBIT 7-
Th f' 3 1. Clarify the
e IVC' problem.
step concept
generation 0 Understanding
method. 0 Problem

decomposition
0 Focus on critical
subproblems

 

Subproblems

 

2. Search 3. Search
externally. internally.

0 Lead users 0 Individual
0 Experts 0 Group

0 Patents

0 Literature

0 Benchmarking

   

New Concepts

   
 

Existing Concepts

4. Explore
systematically.

0 Classification tree
0 Combination table

Integrated Solutions

5. Reflect on the
solutions and
the process.

0 Constructive
feedback

Step 1: Clarify the Problem

Clarifying the problem consists of developing a general understanding and then breaking
the problem down into subproblems if necessary.

The mission statement for the project, the customer needs list, and the preliminary
product specification are the ideal inputs to the concept generation process, although
often these pieces of information are still being refined as the concept generation phaseConcept Generation 121

begins. Ideally the team has been involved both in the identification of the customer needs
and in the setting of the target product specifications. Those members of the team who
were not involved in these preceding steps should become familiar with the processes
used and their results before concept generation activities begin. (See Chapter 5, Identify-
ing Customer Needs, and Chapter 6, Product Specifications.)

As stated before, the challenge was to “design a better handheld roofing nailer.” The
scope of the design problem could have been defined more generally (e.g., “fasten roof-
ing materials”) or more specifically (e.g., “improve the speed of the existing pneumatic
tool concept”). Some of the assumptions in the team’s mission statement were:

0 The nailer will use nails (as opposed to adhesives, screws, etc.).
0 The nailer will be compatible with nail magazines on existing tools.

0 The nailer will nail through roofing shingles into wood.
0 The nailer will be handheld.

Based on the assumptions, the team had identified the customer needs for a handheld
nailer. These included:

0 The nailer inserts nails in rapid succession.
° The nailer is lightweight.
° The nailer has no noticeable nailing delay after tripping the tool.

The team gathered supplemental information to clarify and quantify the needs, such as the
approximate energy and speed of the nailing. These basic needs were subsequently translated
into target product specifications. The target specifications included the following:

0 Nail lengths from 25 millimeters to 38 millimeters.
0 Maximum nailing energy of 40 joules per nail.

° Nailing forces of up to 2,000 newtons.

0 Peak nailing rate of one nail per second.

° Average nailing rate of 12 nails per minute.

0 Tool mass less than 4 kilograms.

0 Maximum trigger delay of 0.25 second.

Decompose a Complex Problem into Simpler Subproblems

Many design challenges are too complex to solve as a single problem and can be use-
fully divided into several simpler subproblems. For example, the design of a complex
product like a document copier can be thought of as a collection of more focused design
problems, including, for example, the design of a document handler, the design of a paper
feeder, the design of a printing device, and the design of an image capture device. In
some cases, however, the design problem cannot readily be divided into subproblems. For
example, the problem of designing a paper clip may be hard to divide into subproblems.
As a general rule, we feel that teams should attempt to decompose design problems, but
should be aware that such a decomposition may not be very useful for products with ex-
tremely simple functions.

Dividing a problem into simpler subproblems is called problem decomposition. There
are many schemes by which a problem can be decomposed. Here we demonstrate a func-
tional decomposition and also list several other approaches that are frequently useful.122 Chapter 7

 

 

 

 

Input Output
Energy (?) —> ——> Energy (?)
H h |
Material (nails) —> ﬁned“; d —> Material (driven nail)
Signal (tool "trip") ————— > ————— > Signal (?)
(a)

 

Energy —

 

     
  

Nails —>

"Trip" ofTool — — — - y

   
 
 
  

 

  
  
 

  
   

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Store or Convert
accept energy to
I external I translational
energy energy
Apply .
Sto_|re —> lsolalte translational BrIﬁ/en
rim 8 naI energy to nail a
|
' /
| /
_ _ _ _ /
. /
Sense TrIgger /
. ————— p — — — —
trIp tool
lb)

EXHIBIT 7-4 Function diagram of a handheld nailer arising from a functional decomposition: (a) overall “black
box”; (b) refinement showing subfunctions.

The first step in decomposing a problem functionally is to represent it as a single black
box operating on material, energy, and signal ﬂows, as shown in Exhibit 7-4(a). Thin solid
lines denote the transfer and conversion of energy, thick solid lines signify the move-
ment of material within the system, and dashed lines represent the ﬂows of control and
feedback signals within the system. This black box represents the overall function of the
product.

The next step in functional decomposition is to divide the single black box into
subfunctions to create a more specific description of what the elements of the product
might do in order to implement the overall function of the product. Each subfunction
can generally be further divided into even simpler subfunctions. The division process is
repeated until the team members agree that each subfunction is simple enough to work
with. A good rule of thumb is to create between 3 and 10 subfunctions in the diagram.
The end result, shown in Exhibit 7-4(b), is a function diagram containing subfunctions
connected by energy, material, and signal ﬂows.Concept Generation 123

Note that at this stage the goal is to describe the functional elements of the product
without implying a specific technological working principle for the product concept. For
example, Exhibit 7-4(b) includes the subfunction “isolate nail.” This subfunction is ex-
pressed in such a way that it does not imply any particular physical solution concept, such
as indexing the coil of nails into a slot or breaking a nail sideways off of the stick. The
team should consider each subfunction in turn and ask whether it is expressed in a way
that does not imply a particular physical solution principle.

There is no single correct way of creating a function diagram and no single correct
functional decomposition of a product. A helpful way to create the diagram is to quickly
create several drafts and then work to refine them into a single diagram that the team is
comfortable with. Some useful techniques for getting started are:

0 Create a function diagram of an existing product.

0 Create a function diagram based on an arbitrary product concept already generated by
the team or based on a known subfunction technology. Be sure to generalize the dia-
gram to the appropriate level of abstraction.

° Follow one of the ﬂows (e.g., material) and determine what operations are required.
The details of the other ﬂows can be derived by thinking about their connections to the
initial ﬂow.

Note that the function diagram is typically not unique. In particular, subfunctions can
often be ordered in different ways to produce different function diagrams. Also note that
in some applications the material, energy, and signal ﬂows are difficult to identify. In
these cases, a simple list of the subfunctions of the product, without connections between
them, is often sufficient.

Functional decomposition is most applicable to technical products, but it can also be
applied to simple and apparently nontechnical products. For example, an ice cream scoop
has material ﬂow of ice cream being separated, formed, transported, and deposited. These
subfunctions could form the basis of a problem decomposition.

Functional decomposition is only one of several possible ways to divide a problem into
simpler subproblems. Two other approaches are:

° Decomposition by sequence of user actions: For example, the nailer problem might
be broken down into three user actions: moving the tool to the gross nailing position,
positioning the tool precisely, and triggering the tool. This approach is often useful for
products with very simple technical functions involving a lot of user interaction.

° Decomposition by key customer needs: For the nailer, this decomposition might include
the following subproblems: fires nails in rapid succession, is lightweight, and has a large
nail capacity. This approach is often useful for products in which form, and not working
principles or technology, is the primary problem. Examples of such products include
toothbrushes (assuming the basic brush concept is retained) and storage containers.

Focus Initial Efforts on the Critical Subproblems

The goal of all of these decomposition techniques is to divide a complex problem into
simpler problems such that these simpler problems can be tackled in a focused way. Once
problem decomposition is complete, the team chooses the subproblems that are most criti-
cal to the success of the product and that are most likely to benefit from novel or creative1 24 Chapter 7

solutions. This approach involves a conscious decision to defer the solution of some of the
subproblems. For example, the nailer team chose to focus on the subproblems of storing/
accepting energy, converting the energy to translational energy, and applying the trans-
lational energy to the nail. The team felt confident that the nail handling and triggering
issues could be solved after the energy storage and conversion issues were addressed. The
team also deferred most of the user interaction issues of the tool. The team believed that
the choice of a basic working principle for the tool would so constrain the eventual form
of the tool that they had to begin with the core technology and then proceed to consider
how to embody that technology in an attractive and user-friendly form. Teams can usually
agree after a few minutes of discussion on which subproblems should be addressed first
and which should be deferred for later consideration.

Step 2: Search Externally

External search is aimed at finding existing solutions to both the overall problem and
the subproblems identified during the problem clarification step. While external search
is listed as the second step in the concept generation method, this sequential labeling
is deceptive; external search occurs continually throughout the development process.
Implementing an existing solution is usually quicker and cheaper than developing a new
solution. Liberal use of existing solutions allows the team to focus its creative energy on
the critical subproblems for which there are no satisfactory prior solutions. Furthermore,
a conventional solution to one subproblem can frequently be combined with a novel so-
lution to another subproblem to yield a superior overall design. For this reason external
search includes detailed evaluation not only of directly competitive products but also of
technologies used in products with related subfunctions.

The external search for solutions is essentially an information-gathering process.
Available time and resources can be optimized by using an expand-and-focus strategy:
first expand the scope of the search by broadly gathering information that might be re-
lated to the problem and then focus the scope of the search by exploring the promising
directions in more detail. Too much of either approach will make the external search
inefficient.

There are at least five good ways to gather information from external sources: lead
user interviews, expert consultation, patent searches, literature searches, and competitive
benchmarking.

Interview Lead Users

While identifying customer needs, the team may have sought out or encountered lead
users. Lead users are those users of a product who experience needs months or years be-
fore the majority of the market and stand to benefit substantially from a product innova-
tion (von Hippel, 1988). Frequently these lead users will have already invented solutions
to meet their needs. This is particularly true among highly technical user communities,
such as those in the medical or scientific fields. Lead users may be sought out in the mar-
ket for which the team is developing the new product, or they may be found in markets
for products implementing some of the subfunctions of the product.

In the handheld nailer case, the nailer team consulted with the building contractors
from the PBS television series This Old House in order to solicit new concepts. These
lead users, who are exposed to tools from many manufacturers, made many interestingConcept Generation 125

observations about the weaknesses in existing tools, but in this case did not provide many
new product concepts.

Consult Experts

Experts with knowledge of one or more of the subproblems not only can provide solu-
tion concepts directly but also can redirect the search in a more fruitful area. Experts may
include professionals at firms manufacturing related products, professional consultants,
university faculty, and technical representatives of suppliers. These people can be found
by calling universities, by calling companies, and by looking up authors of articles. While
finding experts can be hard work, it is almost always less time consuming than re-creating
existing knowledge.

Most experts are willing to talk on the telephone or meet in person for an hour or so
without charge. In general, consultants will expect to be paid for time they spend on a
problem beyond an initial meeting or telephone conversation. Suppliers are usually will-
ing to provide several days of effort without direct compensation if they anticipate that
someone will use their product as a component in a design. Of course, experts at directly
competing firms are in most cases unwilling to provide proprietary information about
their product designs. A good habit to develop is to always ask people consulted to sug-
gest others who should be contacted. The best information often comes from pursuing
these “second generation” leads.

The nailer design team consulted dozens of experts, including a rocket fuel specialist,
electric motor researchers at MIT, and engineers from a vendor of gas springs. Most of
this consultation was done on the telephone, although the engineers from the spring ven-
dor made two trips to visit the team, at their company’s expense.

Search Patents

Patents are a rich and readily available source of technical information containing detailed
drawings and explanations of how many products work. The main disadvantage of pat-
ent searches is that concepts found in recent patents are protected (generally for 20 years
from the date of the patent application), so there may be a royalty involved in using them.
However, patents are also useful to see what concepts are already protected and must be
avoided or licensed. Concepts contained in foreign patents without global coverage and in
expired patents can be used without payment of royalties. See Chapter 16, Patents and In-
tellectual Property, for an explanation of patent rights and how to understand patent claims.

The formal indexing scheme for patents is difficult for novices to navigate. Fortu-
nately, several databases contain the actual text of all patents. These text databases can
be searched electronically by key words. Key word searches can be conducted efficiently
with only modest practice and are remarkably effective in finding patents relevant to a
particular product. Copies of U.S. patents including illustrations can be obtained for a
nominal fee from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office and from several suppliers. (See
the Web site www.ulrich-eppinger.net for a current list of online patent databases and sup-
pliers of patent documents.)

A U.S. patent search in the area of nailers revealed several interesting concepts. One of
the patents described a motor-driven double-ﬂywheel nailer. One of the illustrations from this
patent is shown in Exhibit 7-5. The design in this patent uses the accumulation of rotational
kinetic energy in a ﬂywheel, which is then suddenly converted into translational energy by a
friction clutch. The energy is then delivered to the nail with a single impact of a drive pin.1 26 Chapter 7

     
  
    

   
 

 
 

28
amen}? ‘-‘-_ .. eu-“mnlgﬁ 'E-‘i‘lm

 

 

            
 

 

   
  

   

A 7.71.1".

- : -.— i-.. - n“\“ s‘

E' "‘J- VII/z'll/I/I'W/l/{a'a’lg’laé’ﬁﬁﬂgez’l”””"
I-Illi—i ——i=gaﬁ
l

. ———= u'Ivl; 7 ”—1;
_I____

l, I'A'll’l
§
44

  

EXHIBIT 7-5 Concept from motor-driven double-ﬂywheel nailer patent (US. Patent 4,042,036). The
accompanying text describing the patent is nine pages long.

Search Published Literature

Published literature includes journals; conference proceedings; trade magazines; govern-
ment reports; market, consumer, and product information; and new product announce-

ments. Literature searches are therefore very fertile sources of existing solutions.

Electronic searches are frequently the most efficient way to gather information from
published literature. Searching the Internet is often a good first step, although the quality
of the results can be hard to assess. More structured databases are available from online
sources. Many databases store only abstracts of articles and not the full text and diagrams.
A follow-up search for an actual article is often needed for complete information. The two
main difficulties in conducting good database searches are determining the key words and
limiting the scope of the search. There is a trade-off between the need to use more key
words for complete coverage and the need to restrict the number of matches to a manage-

able number.Concept Generation 127

Handbooks cataloging technical information can also be very useful references for ex-
ternal search. Examples of such engineering references are Marks ’Standard Handbook of
Mechanical Engineering, Perrys Chemical Engineers’Handbook, and Mechanisms and
Mechanical Devices Soarcebook.

The nailer team found several useful articles related to the subproblems, including ar-
ticles on energy storage describing ﬂywheel and battery technologies. In a handbook they
found an impact tool mechanism that provided a useful energy conversion concept.

Benchmark Related Products

In the context of concept generation, benchmarking is the study of existing products with
functionality similar to that of the product under development or to the subproblems on
which the team is focused. Benchmarking can reveal existing concepts that have been
implemented to solve a particular problem, as well as information on the strengths and
weaknesses of the competition.

At this point the team will likely already be familiar with the competitive and closely
related products. Products in other markets, but with related functionality, are more dif-
ficult to find. One of the most useful sources of this information is the Thomas Register,
a directory of manufacturers of industrial products organized by product type. Often the
hardest part of using the Thomas Register is finding out what related products are actu-
ally called and how they are cataloged. The Thomas Register database can be accessed via
the Internet.

For the nailer, the closely related products included a single-shot gunpowder-actuated
tool for nailing into concrete, an electrical solenoid-actuated tacker, a pneumatic nailer for
factory use, and a palm-held multiblow pneumatic nailer. The products with related func-
tionality (in this case, energy storage and conversion) included air bags and the sodium
azide propellant used as an energy source, chemical hand warmers for skiing, air riﬂes
powered by carbon dioxide cartridges, and portable computers and their battery packs.
The team obtained and disassembled most of these related products in order to discover
the general concepts on which they were based, as well as other, more detailed informa-
tion, including, for example, the names of the suppliers of specific components.

External search is an important method of gathering solution concepts. Skill in con-
ducting external searches is therefore a valuable personal and organizational asset. This
ability can be developed through careful observation of the world in order to develop a
mental database of technologies and through the development of a network of profes-
sional contacts. Even with the aid of personal knowledge and contacts, external search
remains “detective work” and is completed most effectively by those who are persistent
and resourceful in pursuing leads and opportunities.

Step 3: Search Internally

Internal search is the use of personal and team knowledge and creativity to generate
solution concepts. Often called brainstorming, this type of search is internal in that all
of the ideas to emerge from this step are created from knowledge already in the posses-
sion of the team. This activity may be the most open-ended and creative of any task in
product development. We find it useful to think of internal search as a process of re-
trieving a potentially useful piece of information from one’s memory and then adapting128 Chapter 7

that information to the problem at hand. This process can be carried out by individuals
working in isolation or by a group of people working together.
Four guidelines are useful for improving both individual and group internal search:

1. Suspend judgment In most aspects of daily life, success depends on an ability to
quickly evaluate a set of alternatives and take action. For example, none of us would be
very productive if deciding what to wear in the morning or what to eat for breakfast in-
volved an extensive period of generating alternatives before making a judgment. Because
most decisions in our day-to-day lives have implications of only a few minutes or hours,
we are accustomed to making decisions quickly and moving on. Concept generation for
product development is fundamentally different. We have to live with the consequences
of product concept decisions for years. As a result, suspending evaluation for the days or
weeks required to generate a large set of alternatives is critical to success. The imperative
to suspend judgment is frequently translated into the rule that during group concept gen-
eration sessions no criticism of concepts is allowed. A better approach is for individuals
perceiving weaknesses in concepts to channel any judgmental tendencies into suggestions
for improvements or alternative concepts.

2. Generate a lot of ideas. Most experts believe that the more ideas a team generates,
the more likely the team is to explore fully the solution space. Striving for quantity lowers
the expectations of quality for any particular idea and therefore may encourage people to
share ideas they may otherwise view as not worth mentioning. Further, each idea acts as
a stimulus for other ideas, so a large number of ideas has the potential to stimulate even
more ideas.

3. Welcome ideas that may seem infeasible. Ideas which initially appear infeasible
can often be improved, “debugged,” or “repaired” by other members of the team. The
more infeasible an idea, the more it stretches the boundaries of the solution space and en-
courages the team to think of the limits of possibility. Therefore, infeasible ideas are quite
valuable and their expression should be encouraged.

4. Use graphical and physical media. Reasoning about physical and geometric in-
formation with words is difficult. Text and verbal language are inherently inefficient
vehicles for describing physical entities. Whether working as a group or as an individual,
abundant sketching surfaces should be available. Foam, clay, cardboard, and other three-
dimensional media may also be appropriate aids for problems requiring a deep under-
standing of form and spatial relationships.

Both Individual and Group Sessions Can Be Useful

Formal studies of group and individual problem solving suggest that a set of people work-
ing alone for a period of time will generate more and better concepts than the same peo-
ple working together for the same time period (McGrath, 1984). This finding is contrary
to the actual practices of the many firms that perform most of their concept generation
activities in group sessions. Our observations confirm the formal studies, and we believe
that team members should spend at least some of their concept generation time working
alone. We also believe that group sessions are critical for building consensus, communi-
cating information, and refining concepts. In an ideal setting, each individual on the team
would spend several hours working alone and then the group would get together to dis-
cuss and improve the concepts generated by individuals.Concept Generation 129

However, we also know that there is a practical reason for holding group concept gen-
eration sessions: it is one way to guarantee that the individuals in the group will devote a
certain amount of time to the task. Especially in very intense and demanding work envi-
ronments, without scheduling a meeting, few people will allocate several hours for con-
centrated individual effort on generating new concepts. The phone rings, people interrupt,
urgent problems and e-mails demand attention. In certain environments, scheduled group
sessions may be the only way to guarantee that enough attention is paid to the concept
generation activity.

The nailer team used both individual effort and group sessions for internal search. For
example, during one particular week each member was assigned one or two subproblems
and was expected to develop at least 10 solution concepts. This divided the concept gen-
eration work among all members. The group then met to discuss and expand on the indi-
vidually generated concepts. The more promising concepts were investigated further.

Hints for Generating Solution Concepts

Experienced individuals and teams can usually just sit down and begin generating good
concepts for a subproblem. Often these people have developed a set of techniques they
use to stimulate their thinking, and these techniques have become a natural part of their
problem-solving process. Novice product development professionals may be aided by a
set of hints that stimulate new ideas or encourage relationships among ideas. VanGundy
(1988), von Oech (1998), and McKim (1980) give dozens of helpful suggestions. Here
are some hints we have found to be helpful:

° Make analogies. Experienced designers always ask themselves what other devices
solve a related problem. Frequently they will ask themselves if there is a natural or
biological analogy to the problem. They will think about whether their problem exists
at a much larger or smaller dimensional scale than that which they are considering.
They will ask what devices do something similar in an unrelated area of application.
The nailer team, when posing these questions, realized that construction pile drivers
are similar to nailers in some respects. In following up on this idea, they developed the
concept of a multiblow tool.

° Wish and wonder. Beginning a thought or comment with “I wish we could . . .” or “I
wonder what would happen if . . .” helps to stimulate oneself or the group to consider
new possibilities. These questions cause reﬂection on the boundaries of the problem.
For example, a member of the nailer team, when confronted with the required length
of a rail gun (an electromagnetic device for accelerating a projectile) for driving a nail,
said, “I wish the tool could be 1 meter long.” Discussion of this comment led to the
idea that perhaps a long tool could be used like a cane for nailing decking, allowing
users to remain on their feet.

° Use related stimuli. Most individuals can think of a new idea when presented with a
new stimulus. Related stimuli are those stimuli generated in the context of the problem
at hand. For example, one way to use related stimuli is for each individual in a group
session to generate a list of ideas (working alone) and then pass the list to his or her
neighbor. Upon reﬂection on someone else’s ideas, most people are able to generate
new ideas. Other related stimuli include customer needs statements and photographs of
the use environment of the product.130 Chapter 7

° Use unrelated stimuli. Occasionally, random or unrelated stimuli can be effective in
encouraging new ideas. An example of such a technique is to choose, at random, one
of a collection of photographs of objects, and then to think of some way that the ran-
domly generated object might relate to the problem at hand. In a variant of this idea,
individuals can be sent out on the streets with a digital camera to capture random
images for subsequent use in stimulating new ideas. (This may also serve as a good
change of pace for a tired group.)

° Set quantitative goals. Generating new ideas can be exhausting. Near the end of a ses-
sion, individuals and groups may find quantitative goals useful as a motivating force.
The nailer team frequently issued individual concept generation assignments with
quantitative targets of 10 to 20 concepts.

° Use the gallery method. The gallery method is a way to display a large number of con-
cepts simultaneously for discussion. Sketches, usually one concept to a sheet, are taped
or pinned to the walls of the meeting room. Team members circulate and look at each
concept. The creator of the concept may offer explanation, and the group subsequently
makes suggestions for improving the concept or spontaneously generates related con-
cepts. This method is a good way to merge individual and group efforts.

In the 1990s, a Russian problem-solving methodology called TRIZ (a Russian acro-
nym for theory of inventive problem solving) began to be disseminated in Europe and
in the United States. The methodology is primarily useful in identifying physical work-
ing principles to solve technical problems. The key idea underlying TRIZ is to identify
a contradiction that is implicit in a problem. For example, a contradiction in the nailer
problem might be that increasing power (a desirable characteristic) would also tend to
increase weight (an undesirable characteristic). One of the TRIZ tools is a matrix of 39
by 39 characteristics with each cell corresponding to a particular conﬂict between two
characteristics. In each cell of the matrix, up to four physical principles are suggested as
ways of resolving the corresponding conﬂict. There are 40 basic principles, including, for
example, the periodic action principle (i.e., replace a continuous action with a periodic
action, like an impulse). Using TRIZ, the nailer team might have arrived at the concept of
using repeated smaller impacts to drive the nail. The idea of identifying a conﬂict in the
design problem and then thinking about ways to resolve the conﬂict appears to be a very
useful problem-solving heuristic. This approach can be useful in generating concepts even
without adopting the entire TRIZ methodology.

Exhibit 7-6 shows some of the solutions the nailer team generated for the subproblems
of (l) storing or accepting energy and (2) delivering translational energy to a nail.

Step 4: Explore Systematically

As a result of the external and internal search activities, the team will have collected tens
or hundreds of concept fragments—solutions to the subproblems. Systematic exploration
is aimed at navigating the space of possibilities by organizing and synthesizing these so-
lution fragments. The nailer team focused on the energy storage, conversion, and delivery
subproblems and had generated dozens of concept fragments for each subproblem. One
approach to organizing and synthesizing these fragments would be to consider all of theConcept Generation 131

 

EXHlelt-{l 7-6 Solutions to Subproblem
01m: 0 teth Solutions to Subproblem of Applying Translational

SO u rons 0 e of Storing or Accepting Energy Energy to Nail

subproblems

0f(1) storing I Self—regulating chemical reaction emitting

or accepting high-pressure gas

energy and I Carbide (as for lanterns)

(2) delivering I Combusting sawdust from job site Single impact

translational

. I Gun powder
energy to a na11.

I Sodium azide (air bag explosive)

I Fuel—air combustion (butane, propane, acetylene, etc.)
I Compressed air (in tank or from compressor)

I Carbon dioxide in tank

I Electric wall outlet and cord M It" | . t
u Ip e Impac s

I High-pressure oil line (hydraulics) (tens or hundreds)
I Flywheel with charging (spin—up)

I Battery pack on tool, belt, orfloor

I Fuel cell

I Human power: arms or legs

I Methane from decomposing organic materials Multiple impacts

I "Burning” like that of chemical hand warmers (hundreds or thousands)

I Nuclear reactions

m 43an mm:m=

I Cold fusion

 

 

 

 

I Solar electric cells Push 3?
I Solar—steam conversion _

I Steam supply line // ://
I Wind 3333;
I Geothermal Twist-push

 

possible combinations of the fragments associated with each subproblem; however, a
little arithmetic reveals the impossibility of this approach. Given the three subproblems
on which the team focused and an average of 15 fragments for each subproblem, the team
would have to consider 3,375 combinations of fragments (15 X 15 X 15). This would be a
daunting task for even the most enthusiastic team. Furthermore, the team would quickly
discover that many of the combinations do not even make sense. Fortunately, there are
two specific tools for managing this complexity and organizing the thinking of the team:
the concept classiﬁcation tree and the concept combination table. The classification tree
helps the team divide the possible solutions into independent categories. The combination
table guides the team in selectively considering combinations of fragments.132 Chapter 7

EXHIBIT 7-7
A classification
tree for the
nailer energy
source concept
fragments.

Fuel-Air Systems

Chemical

Explosive Systems

    
    
    
 

Pneumatic

Store or
Accept
Energy

Hydraulic

Wall Outlet

Battery

Electrical

Fuel Cell

Nuclear

Concept Classification Tree

The concept classification tree is used to divide the entire space of possible solutions into
several distinct classes that will facilitate comparison and pruning. An example of a tree
for the nailer example is shown in Exhibit 7-7. The branches of this tree correspond to
different energy sources.

The classification tree provides at least four important benefits:

1. Pruning of less promising branches: If by studying the classification tree the
team is able to identify a solution approach that does not appear to have much merit, then
this approach can be pruned and the team can focus its attention on the more promising
branches of the tree. Pruning a branch of the tree requires some evaluation and judgment
and should therefore be done carefully, but the reality of product development is that there
are limited resources and that focusing the available resources on the most promising di-
rections is an important success factor. For the nailer team, the nuclear energy source
was pruned from consideration. Although the team had identified some very intriguing
nuclear devices for use in powering artificial hearts, they felt that these devices would not
be economically practical for at least a decade and would probably be hampered by regu-
latory requirements indefinitely.EXHIBIT 7-8

A new problem
decomposition
assuming an
electrical energy
source and the
accumulation
of energy in

the mechanical
domain.

Concept Generation 133

 

 

 

Electrical Convert Apply Energy
Energy Energy to frAcculmulatel Translational APPIiEd t0 Nail
I Translational - rag: artlona I Energy I
Energy e gy to Nail

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Identification of independent approaches to the problem: Each branch of the tree
can be considered a different approach to solving the overall problem. Some of these ap-
proaches may be almost completely independent of each other. In these cases, the team
can cleanly divide its efforts among two or more individuals or task forces. When two
approaches both look promising, this division of effort can reduce the complexity of the
concept generation activities. It also may engender some healthy competition among the
approaches under consideration. The nailer team found that both the chemical/explosive
branch and the electrical branch appeared quite promising. They assigned these two ap-
proaches to two different subteams and pursued them independently for several weeks.

3. Exposure of inappropriate emphasis on certain branches: Once the tree is con-
structed, the team is able to reﬂect quickly on whether the effort applied to each branch
has been appropriately allocated. The nailer team recognized that they had applied very
little effort to thinking about hydraulic energy sources and conversion technologies. This
recognition guided them to focus on this branch of the tree for a few days.

4. Reﬁnement of the problem decomposition for a particular branch: Sometimes a
problem decomposition can be usefully tailored to a particular approach to the problem.
Consider the branch of the tree corresponding to the electrical energy source. Based on
additional investigation of the nailing process, the team determined that the instantaneous
power delivered during the nailing process was about 10,000 watts for a few milliseconds
and so exceeds the power that is available from a wall outlet, a battery, or a fuel cell (of
reasonable size, cost, and mass). They concluded, therefore, that energy must be accu-
mulated over a substantial period of the nailing cycle (say 100 milliseconds) and then
suddenly released to supply the required instantaneous power to drive the nail. This quick
analysis led the team to add a subfunction (“accumulate translational energy”) to their
function diagram (see Exhibit 7-8). They chose to add the subfunction after the conver-
sion of electrical energy to mechanical energy, but brieﬂy considered the possibility of
accumulating the energy in the electrical domain with a capacitor. This kind of refine-
ment of the function diagram is quite common as the team makes more assumptions
about the approach and as more information is gathered.

The classification tree in Exhibit 7-7 shows the alternative solutions to the energy
source subproblem. However, there are other possible trees. The team might have chosen
to use a tree classifying the alternative solutions to the energy delivery subproblem, show-
ing branches for single impact, multiple impacts, or pushing. Trees can be constructed with
branches corresponding to the solution fragments of any of the subproblems, but certain
classifications are more useful. In general, a subproblem whose solution highly constrains
the possible solutions to the remaining subproblems is a good candidate for a classifica-
tion tree. For example, the choice of energy source (electrical, nuclear, pneumatic, etc.)
constrains whether a motor or a piston-cylinder can be used to convert the energy to
translational energy. In contrast, the choice of energy delivery mechanism (single impact,134

Chapter 7

Convert Apply
Electrical Energy to Accumulate Translational
Translational Energy Energy Energy to Nail

 

 

Rotary motor with
transmission

 

Spring Single impact

 

 

 

 

Linear motor Moving mass Multiple impacts

 

 

 

 

 

Solenoid Push nail

 

UUU

 

 

Rail gun

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 7-9 Concept combination table for the handheld nailer.

multiple impacts, etc.) does not greatly constrain the solutions to the other subproblems.
Reﬂection on which subproblem is likely to most highly constrain the solutions to the
remaining subproblems will usually lead to one or two clear ways to construct the clas-
sification tree.

Concept Combination Table

The concept combination table provides a way to consider combinations of solution
fragments systematically. Exhibit 7-9 shows an example of a combination table that the
nailer team used to consider the combinations of fragments for the electrical branch of
the classification tree. The columns in the table correspond to the subproblems identi-
fied in Exhibit 7-8. The entries in each column correspond to the solution fragments for
each of these subproblems derived from external and internal search. For example, the
subproblem of converting electrical energy to translational energy is the heading for the
first column. The entries in this column are a rotary motor with a transmission, a linear
motor, a solenoid, and a rail gun.

Potential solutions to the overall problem are formed by combining one fragment
from each column. For the nailer example, there are 24 possible combinations (4 X 2 X 3).
Choosing a combination of fragments does not lead spontaneously to a solution to the
overall problem. The combination of fragments must usually be developed and refined
before an integrated solution emerges. This development may not even be possible or may
lead to more than one solution, but at a minimum it involves additional creative thought.
In some ways, the combination table is simply a way to make forced associations among
fragments in order to stimulate further creative thinking; in no way does the mere act of
selecting a combination yield a complete solution.Concept Generation 135

Convert Apply
Electrical Energy to Accumulate Translational
Translational Energy Energy Energy to Nail

 

 

 

Rotary motor with

. . Sin leim act
transmissmn g p

 
   

 

 

 

 

Linear motor Multiple impacts

 

Moving mass '

Solenoid Push nail

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Rail gun

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 7-1 0 In this solution concept, a solenoid compresses a spring and then releases it repeatedly in order to
drive the nail with multiple impacts.

Exhibit 7-10 shows a sketch of a concept arising from the combination of the frag-
ments “solenoid,” “spring,” and “multiple impacts.” Exhibit 7-11 shows some sketches
of concepts arising from the combination of the fragments “rotary motor with transmis-

99 6‘

sion, spring,” and “single impact.” Exhibit 7-12 shows a sketch of a concept arising

99 (S

from the combination of “rotary motor with transmission, spring,” and “multiple im-
pacts.” Exhibit 7-13 shows some sketches of concepts arising from the combination of

99 (S 95 6‘

“linear motor, moving mass, and single impact.”136 Chapter 7

Convert Apply
Electrical Energy to Accumulate Translational
Translational Energy Energy Energy to Nail

 

 

 

Rotary motor with

transmission Sprlng — Slngle Impact

 

 

 

 

Linear motor Moving mass Multiple impacts

 

 

 

 

 

Solenoid Push nail

 

UUU

 

 

Rail gun

 

 

 

 

 

   

EXHIBIT 7-1 1 Multiple solutions arising from the combination of a motor with transmission, a spring, and single
impact. The motor winds a spring, accumulating potential energy that is then delivered to the nail in a single blow.

Two guidelines make the concept combination process easier. First, if a fragment can
be eliminated as being infeasible before combining it with other fragments, then the num-
ber of combinations the team needs to consider is dramatically reduced. For example, if
the team could determine that the rail gun would not be feasible under any condition, they
could reduce the number of combinations from 24 to 18. Second, the concept combination
table should be concentrated on the subproblems that are coupled. Coupled subproblems
are those whose solutions can be evaluated only in combination with the solutions to other
subproblems. For example, the choice of the specific electrical energy source to be usedConcept Generation 137

Convert Apply
Electrical Energy to Accumulate Translational
Translational Energy Energy Energy to Nail

 

 

 

Rotary motor with

. . Sin leim act
transmissmn g p

  

 

 

 

 

Linear motor Multiple impacts

 

Moving mass |

Solenoid Push nail

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Rail gun

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 7-1 2 Solution from the combination of a motor with transmission, a spring, and multiple impacts. The
motor repeatedly winds and releases the spring, storing and delivering energy over several blows.

(e.g., battery versus wall outlet), although extremely critical, is somewhat independent
of the choice of energy conversion (e.g., motor versus solenoid). Therefore, the concept
combination table does not need to contain a column for the different types of electrical
energy sources. This reduces the number of combinations the team must consider. As a
practical matter, concept combination tables lose their usefulness when the number of
columns exceeds three or four.

Managing the Exploration Process

The classification tree and combination tables are tools that a team can use somewhat
ﬂexibly. They are simple ways to organize thinking and guide the creative energies of the
team. Rarely do teams generate only one classification tree and one concept combination
table. More typically the team will create several alternative classification trees and several138 Chapter 7

Convert Apply
Electrical Energy to Accumulate Translational
Translational Energy Energy Energy to Nail

 

 

 

Rotary motor with

. . S rin Sin leim act
transmisswn p g g p

 

 

 

 

Linear motor —— Moving mass Multiple impacts

 

 

 

 

 

Solenoid Push nail

UUU

 

 

 

Rail gun

 

 

 

 

 

"wRAPPEu"
LINEAR
MOTOR

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 7-1 3 Solutions from the combination of a linear motor, a moving mass, and single impact. A linear
motor accelerates a massive hammer, accumulating kinetic energy that is delivered to the nail in a single blow.

concept combination tables. Interspersed with this exploratory activity may be a refining of
the original problem decomposition or the pursuit of additional internal or external search.
The exploration step of concept generation usually acts more as a guide for further creative
thinking than as the final step in the process.

Recall that at the beginning of the process the team chooses a few subproblems on which
to focus attention. Eventually the team must return to address all of the subproblems. This
usually occurs after the team has narrowed the range of alternatives for the critical subprob-
lems. The nailer team narrowed its alternatives to a few chemical and a few electric concepts
and then refined them by working out the user interface, industrial design, and configura-
tion issues. One of the resulting concept descriptions is shown in Exhibit 7-14.EXHIBIT 7-1 4
One of several
refined solution
concepts.

Concept Generation 139

 

 

 

   

 

Courtesy of Product Genesis, Inc.

Step 5: Reflect on the Solutions and the Process

Although the reﬂection step is placed here at the end for convenience in presentation, reﬂec-
tion should in fact be performed throughout the whole process. Questions to ask include:

- Is the team developing confidence that the solution space has been fully explored?
- Are there alternative function diagrams?

- Are there alternative ways to decompose the problem?

- Have external sources been thoroughly pursued?

- Have ideas from everyone been accepted and integrated in the process?

The nailer team members discussed whether they had focused too much attention on
the energy storage and conversion issues in the tool while ignoring the user interface
and overall configuration. They decided that the energy issues remained at the core of
the problem and that their decision to focus on these issues first was justified. They also
wondered if they had pursued too many branches of the classification tree. Initially they
had pursued electrical, chemical, and pneumatic concepts before ultimately settling on an
electric concept. In hindsight, the chemical approach had some obvious safety and cus-
tomer perception shortcomings (they were exploring the use of explosives as an energy
source). They decided that although they liked some aspects of the chemical solution,
they should have eliminated it from consideration earlier in the process, allowing more
time to pursue some of the more promising branches in greater detail.140 Chapter 7

The team explored several of these concepts in more detail and built working proto-
types of nailers incorporating two fundamentally different directions: (1) a motor wind-
ing a spring with energy released in a single blow, and (2) a motor with a rotating mass
that repeatedly hit the nail at a rate of about 10 cycles per second until the nail was fully
driven. Ultimately, the multiblow tool proved to be the most technically feasible approach
and the final product (Exhibit 7-1) was based on this concept.

 

Summary

A product concept is an approximate description of the technology, working principles,
and form of the product. The degree to which a product satisfies customers and can be
successfully commercialized depends to a large measure on the quality of the underlying
concept.

° The concept generation process begins with a set of customer needs and target specifi-
cations and results in a set of product concepts from which the team will make a final
selection.

° In most cases, an effective development team will generate hundreds of concepts, of
which 5 to 20 will merit serious consideration during the subsequent concept selection
activity.

0 The concept generation method presented in this chapter consists of five steps:

1. Clarify the problem. Understand the problem and decompose it into simpler sub-
problems.

2. Search externally. Gather information from lead users, experts, patents, published
literature, and related products.

3. Search internally. Use individual and group methods to retrieve and adapt the
knowledge of the team.

4. Explore systematically. Use classification trees and combination tables to organize
the thinking of the team and to synthesize solution fragments.

5. Reﬂect on the solutions and the process. Identify opportunities for improvement in
subsequent iterations or future projects.

0 Although concept generation is an inherently creative process, teams can benefit from
using a structured method. Such an approach allows full exploration of the design
space and reduces the chance of oversight in the types of solution concepts considered.
It also acts as a map for those team members who are less experienced in design prob-
lem solving.

0 Despite the linear presentation of the concept generation process in this chapter, the
team will likely return to each step of the process several times. Iteration is particularly
common when the team is developing a radically new product.

° Professionals who are good at concept generation seem to always be in great demand
as team members. Contrary to popular opinion, we believe concept generation is a skill
that can be learned and developed.Concept Generation 141

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

Pahl and Beitz were the driving force behind structured design methods in Germany. We
adapt many of their ideas for functional decomposition.
Pahl, Gerhard, Wolfgang Beitz, Jorg Feldhusen, and Karl-Heinrich Grote,
Engineering Design, third edition, K. Wallace and L. Blessing, translators, Springer-
Verlag, New York, 2007.

Hubka and Eder have written in a detailed way about systematic concept generation for
technical products.
Hubka, Vladimir, and W Ernst Eder, Theory of Technical Systems: A Total Concept
Theory for Engineering Design, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1988.

Von Hippel reports on his empirical research on the sources of new product concepts. His
central argument is that lead users are the innovators in many markets.
von Hippel, Eric, The Sources of Innovation, Oxford University Press, New York, 1988.

VanGundy presents dozens of methods for problem solving, many of which are directly
applicable to product concept generation.
VanGundy, Arthur B., Jr., Techniques of Structured Problem Solving, second edition,
Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1988.

Von Oech provides dozens of good ideas for improving individual and group creative
performance.
von Oech, Roger, A Whack on the Side of the Head: How You Can Be More Creative,
revised edition, Warner Books, New York, 1998.

Terwiesch and Ulrich present several useful tips for idea generation as inputs to the
search for outstanding opportunities. Many of the same approaches apply to the concept
generation activity.
Terwiesch, Christian, and Karl T. Ulrich, Innovation Tournaments: Creating and
Selecting Exceptional Opportunities, Harvard Business Press, Boston, May 2009.

McKim presents a holistic approach to developing creative thinking skills in individuals
and groups.
McKim, Robert H., Experiences in Visual Thinking, second edition, Brooks/Cole
Publishing, Monterey, CA, 1980.

Interesting research on a set of standard “templates” for identifying novel product
concepts has been done by Goldenberg and Mazursky.
Goldenberg, Jacob, and David Mazursky, Creativity in Product Innovation, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 2002.

The following are two of the better English-language publications on TRIZ.
Altshuller, Genrich, 40 Principles: T RIZ Keys to Technical Innovation, Technical
Innovation Center, Worcester, MA, 1998.

Terninko, John, Alla Zusman, and Boris Zlotin, Systematic Innovation: An Introduction
to TRIZ, St. Lucie Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1998.142 Chapter 7

McGrath presents studies comparing the relative performance of groups and individuals
in generating new ideas.

McGrath, Joseph E., Groups: Interaction and Performance, Prentice Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, 1984.

Engineering handbooks are handy sources of information on standard technical solutions.
Three good handbooks are:

Exercises

1.

2.

3.

Avallone, Eugene A., Theodore Baumeister III, and Ali Sadegh (eds.), Marks’
Standard Handbook of Mechanical Engineering, eleventh edition, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 2006.

Perry, Robert H., Don W. Green, and James O. Maloney (eds.), Perry is Chemical
Engineers ’Handbook, seventh edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1997.

Sclater, Neil, and Nicholas P. Chironis, Mechanisms and Mechanical Devices
Soarcebook, fourth edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2006.

Decompose the problem of designing a new barbecue grill. Try a functional decompo-
sition as well as a decomposition based on the user interactions with the product.

Generate 20 concepts for the subproblem “prevent fraying of end of rope” as part of a
system for cutting lengths of nylon rope from a spool.

Prepare an external-search plan for the problem of permanently applying serial num-
bers to plastic products.

Thought Questions

1.

2.

What are the prospects for computer support for concept generation activities? Can
you think of any computer tools that would be especially helpful in this process?

What would be the relative advantages and disadvantages of involving actual custom-
ers in the concept generation process?

. For what types of products would the initial focus of the concept generation activity be

on the form and user interface of the product and not on the core technology? Describe
specific examples.

Could you apply the five-step method to an everyday problem like choosing the food
for a picnic?

. Consider the task of generating new concepts for the problem of dealing with leaves

on a lawn. How would a plastic-bag manufacturer’s assumptions and problem decom-
position differ from those of a manufacturer of lawn tools and equipment and from
those of a company responsible for maintaining golf courses around the world? Should
the context of the firm dictate the way concept generation is approached?CHAPTER EIGHT

Concept Selection

 

Courtesy of Novo Nordisk Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

EXHIBIT 8-1

One of the existing outpatient syringes.

143144 Chapter 8

A medical supply company retained a product design firm to develop a reusable syringe
with precise dosage control for outpatient use. One of the products sold by a competitor
is shown in Exhibit 8-1. To focus the development effort, the medical supply company
identified two major problems with its current product: cost (the existing model was
made of stainless steel) and accuracy of dose metering. The company also requested
that the product be tailored to the physical capabilities of the elderly, an important
segment of the target market. To summarize the needs of its client and of the intended
end users, the team established seven criteria on which the choice of a product concept

would be based:

° Ease of handling.

0 Ease of use.

0 Readability of dose settings.
0 Dose metering accuracy.

0 Durability.

0 Ease of manufacture.

° Portability.

The team described the concepts under consideration with the sketches shown in Ex-
hibit 8-3. Although each concept nominally satisfied the key customer needs, the team
was faced with choosing the best concept for further design, refinement, and production.
The need to select one syringe concept from many raises several questions:

° How can the team choose the best concept, given that the designs are still quite abstract?
° How can a decision be made that is embraced by the whole team?

° How can desirable attributes of otherwise weak concepts be identified and used?

0 How can the decision-making process be documented?

This chapter uses the syringe example to present a concept selection methodology ad-
dressing these and other issues.

Concept Selection Is an Integral Part of the Product
Development Process

Early in the development process the product development team identifies a set of cus-
tomer needs. By using a variety of methods, the team then generates alternative solution
concepts in response to these needs. (See Chapter 5, Identifying Customer Needs, and
Chapter 7, Concept Generation, for more detail on these activities.) Concept selection is
the process of evaluating concepts with respect to customer needs and other criteria, com-
paring the relative strengths and weaknesses of the concepts, and selecting one or more
concepts for further investigation, testing, or development. Exhibit 8-2 illustrates how
the concept selection activity is related to the other activities that make up the concept
development phase of the product development process. Although this chapter focuses on
the selection of an overall product concept at the beginning of the development process,
the method we present is also useful later in the development process when the team must
select subsystem concepts, components, and production processes.Concept Selection 1 45

4': 4" <1 <1 4': <1 4':

 

    
   

 

  
 

Mission ' ' ' ' ‘ ' Development
Statement Identify Establish Generate Select Test Set Plan Plan
—> Customer —> Target —> Product Product Product —> Final —> Downstream —>
Needs Specifications Concepts Concept(s) Concept(s) Speciﬁcations Development

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Perform Economic Analysis
Benchmark Competitive Products

Build andTest Models and Prototypes

EXHIBIT 8-2 Concept selection is part of the overall concept development phase.

While many stages of the development process benefit from unbounded creativity
and divergent thinking, concept selection is the process of narrowing the set of concept
alternatives under consideration. Although concept selection is a convergent process, it is
frequently iterative and may not produce a dominant concept immediately. A large set of
concepts is initially winnowed down to a smaller set, but these concepts may subsequently
be combined and improved to temporarily enlarge the set of concepts under consideration.
Through several iterations a dominant concept is finally chosen. Exhibit 8-4 illustrates the
successive narrowing and temporary widening of the set of options under consideration
during the concept selection activity.

All Teams Use Some Method for Choosing a Concept

Whether or not the concept selection process is explicit, all teams use some method to
choose among concepts. (Even those teams generating only one concept are using a
method: choosing the first concept they think of.) The methods vary in their effectiveness
and include the following:

° External decision: Concepts are turned over to the customer, client, or some other ex-
ternal entity for selection.

0 Product champion: An inﬂuential member of the product development team chooses a
concept based on personal preference.

° Intuition: The concept is chosen by its feel. Explicit criteria or trade-offs are not used.
The concept just seems better.

° Multivoting: Each member of the team votes for several concepts. The concept with
the most votes is selected.

° Web-based survey: Using an online survey tool, each concept is rated by many people
to find the best ones.

0 Pros and cons: The team lists the strengths and weaknesses of each concept and makes
a choice based upon group opinion.

° Prototype and test: The organization builds and tests prototypes of each concept, mak-
ing a selection based upon test data.

° Decision matrices: The team rates each concept against prespecified selection criteria,
which may be weighted.146 Chapter 8

 

 

 

M07? 9%”?—
9Ekb€b rwu? MW: 553;: 11; ﬁﬁrmVT‘E'
MHCwﬁV» ruwv (NW

A‘
Concept A: ‘| ‘1 ————— l
Master Cylinder I J _____

(I

J 1 Manama VIM,

95? PM?
2mm P— WE WW

Marv: W gamma Am 4; gap 'In of
WHY-y mam wm= "(
0F PLUMAEv—DHWMZMT

WW ewe W
M

Mop? Wm WWW 10'
(0 99V 9096 are,
6% FUNQEV—

   
   
 
 

Concept B:
Rubber Brake

ﬂ/Uklﬁfv—

Pz—w’E HMEm
E. I
f / mg; [WNW

 

 

 

 

 

 

Concept C:
Ratchet _
[MW/«TN— VIM,
Mum-111w PH/NREV— 10’ AMP Wu, W
mmzv— To ear War. Tum m 1» meme
condemn
we : WW gnaw:
Imam/m T1! 691’ W,
Concept D: NAME?”
Plunge Stop

 

 

EXHIBIT 8-3 Seven concepts for the outpatient syringe. The product development team generated the seven
sketches to describe the basic concepts under consideration.Concept Selection 1 47

W ear my.

   
   
   

NM? " ”I? $51” by??? W? ”“55, ‘3’?!" W‘Jﬁ

a] Half—F L6 w» m'mm AMI? FWH
9m? FW— T, (WET
Aw W99"

Concept E:

Swash Ring

 

FLUNAW- 9mm arr/par

   

wwﬁw AHNVLLM

NW: 451’ we? lay FU’vHINé 1,sz
Fara—\A/kP—DV {NJEZT 3T FUQHINQ

Wm M.

yrﬁuq’lNA ﬁx”) mmﬂz zen/war
Concept F: 5
Lever Set

WW1? 47AM W1” gar Mr; H *rummq
(7?" W9. lNJEﬁF PT
WWW MUN-’0'?-
[:::::: W W—
NEEWEé
AN? WkLG

Ilryggwm-

   
    
   

 

 

Concept G:
Dial Screw

     
   
 

 

 

 

”7mm

 

Q9562

{1594? W

EXHIBIT 8-3 Continued148 Chapter 8

O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O

 

concept generation I

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 8-4 Concept selection is an iterative process closely related to concept generation and testing. The
concept screening and scoring methods help the team refine and improve the concepts, leading to one or more
promising concepts upon which further testing and development activities will be focused.

The concept selection method in this chapter is built around the use of decision matri-
ces for evaluating each concept with respect to a set of selection criteria.

A Structured Method Offers Several Benefits

All of the front-end activities of product development have tremendous inﬂuence on
eventual product success. Certainly the response of the market to a product depends criti-
cally on the product concept, but many practitioners and researchers also believe that the
choice of a product concept dramatically constrains the eventual manufacturing cost of
the product. A structured concept selection process helps to maintain objectivity through-
out the concept phase of the development process and guides the product development
team through a critical, difficult, and sometimes emotional process. Specifically, a struc-
tured concept selection method offers the following potential benefits:

° A customer-focused product: Because concepts are explicitly evaluated against
customer-oriented criteria, the selected concept is likely to be focused on the customer.

° A competitive design: By benchmarking concepts with respect to existing designs, de-
signers push the design to match or exceed their competitors’ performance along key
dimensions.Concept Selection 1 49

° Better product-process coordination: Explicit evaluation of the product with respect
to manufacturing criteria improves the product’s manufacturability and helps to match
the product with the process capabilities of the firm.

° Reduced time to product introduction: A structured method becomes a common lan-
guage among design engineers, manufacturing engineers, industrial designers, market-
ers, and project managers, resulting in decreased ambiguity, faster communication, and
fewer false starts.

° Effective group decision making: Within the development team, organizational phi-
losophy and guidelines, willingness of members to participate, and team member ex-
perience may constrain the concept selection process. A structured method encourages
decision making based on objective criteria and minimizes the likelihood that arbitrary
or personal factors inﬂuence the product concept.

° Documentation of the decision process: A structured method results in a readily un-
derstood archive of the rationale behind concept decisions. This record is useful for
assimilating new team members and for quickly assessing the impact of changes in the
customer needs or in the available alternatives.

Overview of Methodology

We present a two-stage concept selection methodology, although the first stage may suf-
fice for simple design decisions. The first stage is called concept screening and the sec-
ond stage is called concept scoring. Each is supported by a decision matrix that is used by
the team to rate, rank, and select the best concept(s). Although the method is structured,
we emphasize the role of group insight to improve and combine concepts.

Concept selection is often performed in two stages as a way to manage the complexity
of evaluating dozens of product concepts. The application of these two methods is illus-
trated in Exhibit 8-4. Screening is a quick, approximate evaluation aimed at producing a
few viable alternatives. Scoring is a more careful analysis of these relatively few concepts
in order to choose the single concept most likely to lead to product success.

During concept screening, rough initial concepts are evaluated relative to a common
reference concept using the screening matrix. At this preliminary stage, detailed quantita-
tive comparisons are difficult to obtain and may be misleading, so a coarse comparative
rating system is used. After some alternatives are eliminated, the team may choose to
move on to concept scoring and conduct more detailed analyses and finer quantitative
evaluation of the remaining concepts using the scoring matrix as a guide. Throughout the
screening and scoring process, several iterations may be performed, with new alternatives
arising from the combination of the features of several concepts. Exhibits 8-5 and 8-7 il-
lustrate the screening and scoring matrices, using the selection criteria and concepts from
the syringe example.

Both stages, concept screening and concept scoring, follow a six-step process that
leads the team through the concept selection activity. The steps are:

1. Prepare the selection matrix.

2. Rate the concepts.

3. Rank the concepts.

4. Combine and improve the concepts.150 Chapter 8

5. Select one or more concepts.
6. Reﬂect on the results and the process.

Although we present a well-defined process, the team, not the method, creates the
concepts and makes the decisions that determine the quality of the product. Ideally, teams
are made up of people from different functional groups within the organization. Each
member brings unique views that increase the understanding of the problem and thus fa-
cilitate the development of a successful, customer-oriented product. The concept selection
method exploits the matrices as visual guides for consensus building among team mem-
bers. The matrices focus attention on the customer needs and other decision criteria and
on the product concepts for explicit evaluation, improvement, and selection.

Concept Screening

Concept screening is based on a method developed by the late Stuart Pugh in the 1980s
and is often called Pugh concept selection (Pugh, 1990). The purposes of this stage are
to narrow the number of concepts quickly and to improve the concepts. Exhibit 8-5 illus-
trates the screening matrix used during this stage.

Step 1: Prepare the Selection Matrix

To prepare the matrix, the team selects a physical medium appropriate to the problem
at hand. Individuals and small groups with a short list of criteria may use matrices on
paper similar to Exhibit 8-5 or Appendix A for their selection process. For larger groups a
chalkboard or ﬂip chart is desirable to facilitate group discussion.

 

 

 

 

 

Concepts
A B C D E F G
Master Rubber (Reference) Swash Lever Dial

Selection Criteria Cylinder Brake Ratchet Plunge Stop Ring Set Screw
Ease of handling 0 O — O O — —
Ease of use 0 — — O O + O
Readability of settings 0 O + O + O +
Dose metering accuracy 0 O O O — O O
Durability 0 O O O O + 0
Ease of manufacture + — — O O — O
Portability + + O O + O 0
Sum +’s 2 1 1 O 2 2 1
Sum 0's 5 4 3 7 4 3 5
Sum —'s O 2 3 O 1 2 1
Net Score 2 —1 —2 O 1 O 0
Rank 1 6 7 3 2 3 3

Continue? Yes No No Combine Yes Combine Revise

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 8-5 The concept-screening matrix. For the syringe example, the team rated the concepts against the
reference concept using a simple code (+ for “better than,” 0 for “same as,” i for “worse than”) in order to identify
some concepts for further consideration. Note that the three concepts ranked “3” all received the same net score.Concept Selection 1 51

Next, the inputs (concepts and criteria) are entered on the matrix. Although possibly
generated by different individuals, concepts should be presented at the same level of detail
for meaningful comparison and unbiased selection. The concepts are best portrayed by both
a written description and a graphical representation. A simple one-page sketch of each con-
cept greatly facilitates communication of the key features of the concept. The concepts are
entered along the top of the matrix, using graphical or textual labels of some kind.

If the team is considering more than about 12 concepts, the multivote technique may be
used to quickly choose the dozen or so concepts to be evaluated with the screening matrix.
Multivoting is a technique in which members of the team simultaneously vote for three
to five concepts by applying “dots” to the sheets describing their preferred concepts. See
Chapter 3, Opportunity Identification, for a description of multivoting applied to a broad set
of product opportunities. The concepts with the most dots are chosen for concept screening.
It is also possible to use the screening matrix method with a large number of concepts. This
is facilitated by a spreadsheet and it is then useful to transpose the rows and colLunns. (Ar-
range the concepts in this case in the left column and the criteria along the top.)

The selection criteria are listed along the left-hand side of the screening matrix, as
shown in Exhibit 8-5. These criteria are chosen based on the customer needs the team
has identified, as well as on the needs of the enterprise, such as low manufacturing cost
or minimal risk of product liability. The criteria at this stage are usually expressed at a
fairly high level of abstraction and typically include from 5 to 10 dimensions. The selec-
tion criteria should be chosen to differentiate among the concepts. However, because each
criterion is given equal weight in the concept screening method, the team should be care-
ful not to list many relatively unimportant criteria in the screening matrix. Otherwise, the
differences among the concepts relative to the more important criteria will not be clearly
reﬂected in the outcome.

After careful consideration, the team chooses a concept to become the benchmark, or
reference concept, against which all other concepts are rated. The reference is generally
either an industry standard or a straightforward concept with which the team members
are very familiar. It can be a commercially available product, a best-in-class benchmark
product that the team has studied, an earlier generation of the product, any one of the
concepts under consideration, or a combination of subsystems assembled to represent the
best features of different products.

Step 2: Rate the Concepts

A relative score of “better than” (+), “same as” (0), or “worse than” (—) is placed in each
cell of the matrix to represent how each concept rates in comparison to the reference con-
cept relative to the particular criterion. It is generally advisable to rate every concept on
one criterion before moving to the next criterion. However, with a large number of con-
cepts, it is faster to use the opposite approach—to rate each concept completely before
moving on to the next concept.

Some people find the coarse nature of the relative ratings difficult to work with. How-
ever, at this stage in the design process, each concept is only a general notion of the
ultimate product, and more detailed ratings are largely meaningless. In fact, given the
imprecision of the concept descriptions at this point, it is very difficult to consistently
compare concepts to one another unless one concept (the reference) is consistently used
as a basis for comparison.152 Chapter 8

When available, objective metrics can be used as the basis for rating a concept. For
example, a good approximation of assembly cost is the number of parts in a design. Simi-
larly, a good approximation of ease of use is the number of operations required to use the
device. Such metrics help to minimize the subjective nature of the rating process. Some
objective metrics suitable for concept selection may arise from the process of establishing
target specifications for the product. (See Chapter 6, Product Specifications, for a discus-
sion of metrics.) Absent objective metrics, ratings are established by team consensus, al-
though secret ballot or other methods may also be useful. At this point the team may also
wish to note which selection criteria need further investigation and analysis.

Step 3: Rank the Concepts

After rating all the concepts, the team sums the number of “better than, same as,” and
“worse than” scores and enters the sum for each category in the lower rows of the matrix.
From our example in Exhibit 8-5, concept A was rated to have two criteria better than,
five the same as, and none worse than the reference concept. Next, a net score can be cal-
culated by subtracting the number of “worse than” ratings from the “better than” ratings.

Once the summation is completed, the team rank-orders the concepts. Obviously, in
general those concepts with more pluses and fewer minuses are ranked higher. Often at
this point the team can identify one or two criteria that really seem to differentiate the
concepts.

Step 4: Combine and Improve the Concepts

Having rated and ranked the concepts, the team should verify that the results make sense
and then consider if there are ways to combine and improve certain concepts. Two issues
to consider are:

° Is there a generally good concept that is degraded by one bad feature? Can a minor
modification improve the overall concept and yet preserve a distinction from the other
concepts?

° Are there two concepts that can be combined to preserve the “better than” qualities
while annulling the “worse than” qualities?

Combined and improved concepts are then added to the matrix, rated by the team,
and ranked along with the original concepts. In our example, the team noticed that con-
cepts D and F could be combined to remove several of the “worse than” ratings to yield
a new concept, DF, to be considered in the next round. Concept G was also considered
for revision. The team decided that this concept was too bulky, so the excess storage

space was removed while retaining the injection technique. These revised concepts are
shown in Exhibit 8-6.

Step 5: Select One or More Concepts

Once the team members are satisfied with their understanding of each concept and its
relative quality, they decide which concepts are to be selected for further refinement and
analysis. Based upon previous steps, the team will likely develop a clear sense of which
are the most promising concepts. The number of concepts selected for further review will
be limited by team resources (personnel, money, and time). In our example, the team se-
lected concepts A and E to be considered along with the revised concept G+ and the newConcept G+:
Dial Screw+

Concept DF:
Lever Stop

Concept Selection 1 53

    
    
  
    

RAM/L— Zélzwg

    
    
  
 

II7II'I IIIIIII‘IIIIIIIII I llll__
. -L:_ILII—

HA: H" N w ftgrpN

“~19va emuué AM?
FIWN W

WMMZ- (WW
WL 19 Veuvew— wee)

‘

 

 

 

 

306W? £74512 INDWP.

WL W
1:49; FW-é‘ﬁﬂ'lklﬁ

505% NA MwHﬁNléM

MNNWI’MZ
ﬂﬁaN

     
     
  

\ ALWquaNs ma

‘?
‘.\
II
It
\

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

VlALz

EXHIBIT 8-6 New and revised concepts for the syringe. During the selection process, the syringe team revised
concept G and generated a new concept, DF, arising from the combination of concepts D and F.

concept DF. Having determined the concepts for further analysis, the team must clarify
which issues need to be investigated further before a final selection can be made.

The team must also decide whether another round of concept screening will be per-
formed or whether concept scoring will be applied next. If the screening matrix is not
seen to provide sufficient resolution for the next step of evaluation and selection, then the
concept-scoring stage with its weighted selection criteria and more detailed rating scheme
would be used.

Step 6: Reflect on the Results and the Process

All of the team members should be comfortable with the outcome. If an individual is not
in agreement with the decision of the team, then perhaps one or more important criteria
are missing from the screening matrix, or perhaps a particular rating is in error, or at least
is not clear. An explicit consideration of whether the results make sense to everyone re-
duces the likelihood of making a mistake and increases the likelihood that the entire team
will be solidly committed to the subsequent development activities.154 Chapter 8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Concept
A DF E G+
(Reference)
Master Cylinder Lever Stop Swash Ring Dial Screw+
Selection Weighted Weighted Weighted Weighted
Criteria Weight Rating Score Rating Score Rating Score Rating Score
Ease of handling 5% 3 0.15 3 0.15 4 0.2 4 0.2
Ease of use 15% 3 0.45 4 0.6 4 0.6 3 0.45
Readability of settings 10% 2 0.2 3 0.3 5 0.5 5 0.5
Dose metering accuracy 25% 3 0.75 3 0.75 2 0.5 3 0.75
Durability 15% 2 0.3 5 0.75 4 0.6 3 0.45
Ease of manufacture 20% 3 0.6 3 0.6 2 0.4 2 0.4
Portability 10% 3 0.3 3 0.3 3 0.3 3 0.3
Total Score 2.75 3.45 3.10 3.05
Rank 4 1 2 3
Continue? No Develop No No

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 8-7 The concept-scoring matrix. This method uses a weighted sum of the ratings to determine concept
ranking. While concept A serves as the overall reference concept, the separate reference points for each criterion are
signified by bold rating values.

Concept Scoring

Concept scoring is used when increased resolution will better differentiate among com-
peting concepts. In this stage, the team weighs the relative importance of the selection
criteria and focuses on more refined comparisons with respect to each criterion. The con-
cept scores are determined by the weighted sum of the ratings. Exhibit 8-7 illustrates the
scoring matrix used in this stage. In describing the concept scoring process, we focus on
the differences relative to concept screening.

Step 1: Prepare the Selection Matrix

As in the screening stage, the team prepares a matrix and identifies a reference concept.
In most cases a computer spreadsheet is the best format to facilitate ranking and sensitivity
analysis. The concepts that have been identified for analysis are entered on the top of the
matrix. The concepts have typically been refined to some extent since concept screening
and may be expressed in more detail. In conjunction with more detailed concepts, the
team may wish to add more detail to the selection criteria. The use of hierarchical rela-
tions is a useful way to illuminate the criteria. For the syringe example, suppose the team
decided that the criterion “ease of use” did not provide sufficient detail to help distin-
guish among the remaining concepts. “Ease of use” could be broken down, as shown in
Exhibit 8-8, to include “ease of injection,” “ease of cleaning,” and “ease of loading.” The
level of criteria detail will depend upon the needs of the team; it may not be necessary to
expand the criteria at all. If the team has created a hierarchical list of customer needs, the
secondary and tertiary needs are good candidates for more detailed selection criteria. (SeeConcept Selection 1 55

 

Ease of Injection

EASE OF USE Ease of Cleaning

Ease of Loading

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 8-8 Hierarchical decomposition of selection criteria. In conjunction with more
detailed concepts, the team may choose to break down criteria to the level of detail necessary for
meaningful comparison.

Chapter 5, Identifying Customer Needs, for an explanation of primary, secondary, and
tertiary needs, and see Appendixes A and B for examples of hierarchical selection criteria.)

After the criteria are entered, the team adds importance weights to the matrix. Several
different schemes can be used to weight the criteria, such as assigning an importance
value from 1 to 5, or allocating 100 percentage points among them, as the team has done
in Exhibit 8-7. There are marketing techniques for empirically determining weights from
customer data, and a thorough process of identifying customer needs may result in such
weights (Urban and Hauser, 1993). However, for the purpose of concept selection the
weights are often determined subjectively by team consensus.

Step 2: Rate the Concepts

As in the screening stage, it is generally easiest for the team to focus its discussion by
rating all of the concepts with respect to one criterion at a time. Because of the need for
additional resolution to distinguish among competing concepts, a finer scale is now used.
We recommend a scale from 1 to 5:

Relative Performance Rating

 

Much worse than reference
Worse than reference
Same as reference

Better than reference

Much better than reference

U'IJ>(.A.)N—\

 

Another scale, such as 1 to 9, may certainly be used, but finer scales generally require
more time and effort.

A single reference concept can be used for the comparative ratings, as in the screen-
ing stage; however, this is not always appropriate. Unless by pure coincidence the refer-
ence concept is of average performance relative to all of the criteria, the use of the same
reference concept for the evaluation of each criterion will lead to “scale compression” for
some of the criteria. For example, if the reference concept happens to be the easiest con-
cept to manufacture, all of the remaining concepts will receive an evaluation of 1, 2, or 3

(“much worse than, worse than,” or “same as”) for the ease-of—manufacture criterion,
compressing the rating scale from five levels to three levels.156 Chapter 8

To avoid scale compression, it is possible to use different reference points for the
various selection criteria. Reference points may come from several of the concepts under
consideration, from comparative benchmarking analysis, from the target values of the
product specifications, or other means. It is important that the reference point for each
criterion be well understood to facilitate direct one-to-one comparisons. Using multiple
reference points does not prevent the team from designating one concept as the overall
reference for the purposes of ensuring that the selected concept is competitive relative
to this benchmark. Under such conditions the overall reference concept will simply not
receive a neutral score.

Exhibit 8-7 shows the scoring matrix for the syringe example. The team believed that
the master cylinder concept was not suitable as a reference point for two of the criteria,
and other concepts were used as reference points in these cases.

Appendix B illustrates a more detailed scoring matrix for which the team rated the
concepts on each criterion with no explicit reference points. These ratings were accom-
plished by discussing the merits of every concept with respect to one criterion at a time
and arranging the scores on a 9-point scale.

Step 3: Rank the Concepts

Once the ratings are entered for each concept, weighted scores are calculated by multiply-
ing the raw scores by the criteria weights. The total score for each concept is the sum of
the weighted scores:

n
S. = 2 r..w.
1 i=1 11 I

where

rij = raw rating of concept j for the ith criterion
w = weighting for ith criterion

n = number of criteria

Sj = total score for concept j

Finally, each concept is given a rank corresponding to its total score, as shown in
Exhibit 8-7.

Step 4: Combine and Improve the Concepts

As in the screening stage, the team looks for changes or combinations that improve
concepts. Although the formal concept generation process is typically completed before
concept selection begins, some of the most creative refinements and improvements occur
during the concept selection process as the team realizes the inherent strengths and weak-
nesses of certain features of the product concepts.

Step 5: Select One or More Concepts

The final selection is not simply a question of choosing the concept that achieves the
highest ranking after the first pass through the process. Rather, the team should explore
this initial evaluation by conducting a sensitivity analysis. Using a computer spreadsheet,
the team can vary weights and ratings to determine their effect on the ranking.Caveats

Concept Selection 1 57

By investigating the sensitivity of the ranking to variations in a particular rating, the
team members can assess whether uncertainty about a particular rating has a large impact
on their choice. In some cases they may select a lower-scoring concept about which there
is little uncertainty instead of a higher-scoring concept that may possibly prove unwork-
able or less desirable as they learn more about it.

Based on the selection matrix, the team may decide to select the top two or more con-
cepts. These concepts may be further developed, prototyped, and tested to elicit customer
feedback. See Chapter 9, Concept Testing, for a discussion of methods to assess customer
response to product concepts.

The team may also create two or more scoring matrices with different weightings to
yield the concept ranking for various market segments with different customer prefer-
ences. It may be that one concept is dominant for several segments. The team should also
consider carefully the significance of differences in concept scores. Given the resolution
of the scoring system, small differences are generally not significant.

For the syringe example, the team agreed that concept DF was the most promising and
would be likely to result in a successful product.

Step 6: Reflect on the Results and the Process

As a final step the team reﬂects on the selected concept(s) and on the concept selection
process. In some ways, this is the “point of no return” for the concept development pro-
cess, so everyone on the team should feel comfortable that all of the relevant issues have
been discussed and that the selected concept(s) have the greatest potential to satisfy cus-
tomers and be economically successful.

After each stage of concept selection, it is a useful reality check for the team to review
each of the concepts that are to be eliminated from further consideration. If the team
agrees that any of the dropped concepts is better overall than some of those retained, then
the source of this inconsistency should be identified. Perhaps an important criterion is
missing, not weighted properly, or inconsistently applied.

The organization can also benefit from reﬂection on the process itself. Two questions
are useful in improving the process for subsequent concept selection activities:

0 In what way (if at all) did the concept selection method facilitate team decision making?
0 How can the method be modified to improve team performance?

These questions focus the team on the strengths and weaknesses of the methodology in
relation to the needs and capabilities of the organization.

With experience, users of the concept selection methods will discover several subtleties.
Here we discuss some of these subtleties and point out a few areas for caution.

° Decomposition of concept quality: The basic theory underlying the concept selection
method is that selection criteria—and, by implication, customer needs—can be evaluated
independently and that concept quality is the sum of the qualities of the concept relative
to each criterion. The quality of some product concepts may not be easily decomposed
into a set of independent criteria, or the performance of the concept relative to the differ-
ent criteria may be difficult to relate to overall concept quality. For example, the overall158 Chapter 8

appeal or performance of a tennis racquet design may arise in a highly complex way
from its weight, ease of swinging, shock transmission, and energy absorption. Simply
choosing a concept based on the sum of performance relative to each criterion may fail
to capture complex relationships among these criteria. Keeney and Raiffa (1993) discuss
the problem of multiattribute decision making, including the issue of nonlinear relation-
ships among selection criteria.

Subjective criteria: Some selection criteria, particularly those related to aesthetics,
are highly subjective. Choices among alternatives based solely on subjective criteria
must be made carefully. In general, the development team’s collective judgment is not
the best way to evaluate concepts on subjective dimensions. Rather, the team should
narrow the alternatives to three or four and then solicit the opinions of representative
customers from the target market for the product, perhaps using mock-ups or models
to represent the concepts. (See Chapter 9, Concept Testing.)

To facilitate improvement of concepts: While discussing each concept to determine its
rating, the team may wish to make note of any outstanding (positive or negative) attri-
butes of the concepts. It is useful to identify any features that could be applied to other
concepts, as well as issues that could be addressed to improve the concept. Notes may
be placed directly in the cells of the selection matrix. Such notes are particularly use-
ful in step 4, when the team seeks to combine, refine, and improve the concepts before
making a selection decision.

Where to include cost: Most of the selection criteria are adaptations of the customer
needs. However, “ease of manufacturing” and “manufacturing cost” are not customer
needs. The only reason customers care about manufacturing cost is that it establishes
the lower bound on sale price. Nevertheless, cost is an extremely important factor in
choosing a concept, because it is one of the factors determining the economic success
of the product. For this reason, we advocate the inclusion of some measure of cost or
ease of manufacturing when evaluating concepts, even though these measures are not
true customer needs. Similarly, there may be needs of other stakeholders that were not
expressed by actual customers but are important for economic success of the product.

Selecting elements of aggregate concepts: Some product concepts are really aggrega-
tions of several simpler concepts. If all of the concepts under consideration include
choices from a set of simpler elements, then the simple elements can be evaluated first
and in an independent fashion before the more complex concepts are evaluated. This
sort of decomposition may follow partly from the structure used in concept generation.
For example, if all of the syringes in our example could be used with all of several dif-
ferent needle types, then the selection of a needle concept could be conducted indepen-
dently of the selection of an overall syringe concept.

Applying concept selection throughout the development process: Although through-
out this chapter we have emphasized the application of the method to the selection of
a basic product concept, concept selection is used again and again at many levels of
detail in the design and development process. For example, in the syringe example,
concept selection could be used at the very beginning of the development project to
decide between a single-use or multiple-use approach. Once the basic approach had
been determined, concept selection could be used to choose the basic product concept,
as illustrated in this chapter. Finally, concept selection could be used at the most de-
tailed level of design for resolving decisions such as the choice of colors or materials.Concept Selection 1 59

 

Summary

Concept selection is the process of evaluating concepts with respect to customer needs
and other criteria, comparing the relative strengths and weaknesses of the concepts, and
selecting one or more concepts for further investigation or development.

All teams use some method, implicit or explicit, for selecting concepts. Decision tech-
niques employed for selecting concepts range from intuitive approaches to structured
methods.

Successful design is facilitated by structured concept selection. We recommend a two-
stage process: concept screening and concept scoring.

Concept screening uses a reference concept to evaluate concept variants against selec-
tion criteria. Concept scoring may use different reference points for each criterion.

Concept screening uses a coarse comparison system to narrow the range of concepts
under consideration.

Concept scoring uses weighted selection criteria and a finer rating scale. Concept scor-
ing may be skipped if concept screening produces a dominant concept.

Both screening and scoring use a matrix as the basis of a six-step selection process.
The six steps are:

. Prepare the selection matrix.

. Rate the concepts.

. Rank the concepts.

. Combine and improve the concepts.
Select one or more concepts.

. Reﬂect on the results and the process.

Concept selection is applied not only during concept development but throughout the
subsequent design and development process.

Concept selection is a group process that facilitates the selection of a winning
concept, helps build team consensus, and creates a record of the decision-making
process.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

The concept selection methodology is a decision-making process. Souder outlines other
decision techniques.

Souder, William E., Management Decision Methods for Managers of Engineering
and Research, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1980.

For a more formal treatment of multiattribute decision making, illustrated with a set of
eclectic and interesting case studies, see Keeney and Raiffa.

Keeney, Ralph L., and Howard Raiffa, Decisions with Multiple Objectives:
Preferences and Value Trade-Oﬂs, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1993.160 Chapter 8

Exercises

Pahl and Beitz’s inﬂuential engineering design textbook contains an excellent set of systematic
methods. The book outlines two concept selection methods similar to concept scoring.
Pahl, Gerhard, Wolfgang Beitz, J org Feldhusen, and Karl-Heinrich Grote,
Engineering Design: A Systematic Approach, third edition, K. Wallace and L.
Blessing, translators, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2007.

Weighting alternatives for selection is not a new idea. The following is one of the earlier
references for using selection matrices with weights.
Alger, JR, and CV. Hays, Creative Synthesis in Design, Prentice Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, 1964.

The concept-screening method is based upon the concept selection process presented by
Stuart Pugh. Pugh was known to criticize more quantitative methods, such as the concept-
scoring method presented in this chapter. He cautioned that numbers can be misleading

and can reduce the focus on creativity required to develop better concepts.
Pugh, Stuart, Total Design, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1990.

Concept scoring is similar to a method often called the Kepner—Tregoe method. It is

described, along with other techniques for problem identification and solution, in their text.
Kepner, Charles H., and Benjamin B. Tregoe, The Rational Manager, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1965.

Urban and Hauser describe techniques for determining the relative importance of
different product attributes.
Urban, Glen L., and John R. Hauser, Design and Marketing of New Products, second
edition, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1993.

Otto and Wood present a method to include certainty bounds with the ratings given to

concepts in concept scoring. These can be combined to derive an estimate of the error in

selecting the highest-scoring concept and to compute a confidence interval for the results.
Otto, Kevin N., and Kristin L. Wood, “Estimating Errors in Concept Selection,”
ASME Design Engineering Technical Conferences, Vol. DE-83, 1995, pp. 397—412.

1. How can the concept selection methods be used to benchmark or evaluate existing prod-
ucts? Perform such an evaluation for five automobiles you might consider purchasing.

2. Propose a set of selection criteria for the choice of a battery technology for use in a
portable computer.

3. Perform concept screening for the four pencil holder concepts shown below. Assume
the pencil holders are for a member of a product development team who is continually
moving from site to site.

4. Repeat Exercise 3, but use concept scoring.

l®ﬂ

Zip Pouch Screw Cap Clam Shell SliderConcept Selection 1 61

Thought Questions

1.

2.

How might you use the concept selection method to decide whether to offer a single
product to the marketplace or to offer several different product options?

How might you use the method to determine which product features should be stan-
dard and which should be optional or add-ons?

. Can you imagine an interactive computer tool that would allow a large group (say,

20 or more people) to participate in the concept selection process? How might such a
tool work?

. What could cause a situation in which a development team uses the concept selection

method to agree on a concept that then results in commercial failure?Appendix A

 

Concept-Screening Matrix Example

This matrix was created and used by a development team designing a collar to hold weights onto a barbell.

 

 

 

 

Concepts
Selection Master Velcro Rubber Alligator 4-Part Torsional Screw Wing Hose C- Spring- Magnetic Threaded
Criteria Handcuff Lock Belt Belt Clip Latch (REF) Spring Type Nut Clothespin Clamp Clamp Loaded Bar Plates Bar
Functionality
Lightweight + O + + + 0 + — — + 0 0 + + O
Fits different bars + O + + + O O O O + O + O — O
Weights secured O O — — O O O — + — O O — O +
laterally
Convenience
Tighten from O O O O O O — — — O — O + + —
end/side
Does not roll 0 O O O O O O O O O O O O O 0
Change weights 0 O O O O O O O O O O O + + 0
without removing
collar
Convenience of O O + + O O — — — O — O + + —
placement when
changing weights
Ergonomics
Secure/release + O — — + O — — — 0 — — + — —
(one motion)
Low force to O O O O — O — O O O O O + — O
secure/release
RH/LH usage 0 O O O O O O — — O — — O O —
Not slippery O O + + O O O O O O O O + + 0
when wet
Use with one hand + O O O + O O O O O O O + + O
Durability
Longevity — — — — 0 0 0 + 0 0 + + — — +
Other
Cost of raw 0 O + + O O O O — + O O — — —
materials
Manufacturability 0 — + + O 0 O — + + 0 — — —
Uses existing 0 O O O O O O O O O — O —
weight bars
Sum +’s 4 0 6 6 4 O 1 2 1 4 2 2 8 6 2
SumO’s 11 14 7 7 11 16 11 8 8 11 1O 12 3 4 7
Sum —’s 1 2 3 3 1 O 4 6 7 1 4 2 5 6 7
Net Score 3 —2 3 3 3 O —3 —4 —6 3 —2 O 3 O —5
Rank 1 1O 1 1 1 7 12 13 15 1 1O 7 1 7 15Appendix B

 

Concept-Scoring Matrix Example

A development team generated this matrix while selecting a new concept for a spillproof beverage holder to be used on boats. Note that in this

case the team chose not to define a single concept as the reference for all of the selection criteria.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Concept A Concept C Concept F Concept l Concept J Concept K Concept 0
Weighted Weighted Weighted Weighted Weighted Weighted Weighted
Selection Criteria Weight Rating Score Rating Score Rating Score Rating Score Rating Score Rating Score Rating Score
Flexible Use 20
Use in different locations 15 7 105 7 105 8 120 6 90 6 90 5 75 7 105
Holds different beverages 5 5 25 5 25 3 5 4 20 5 25 3 5 3 5
Maintains Drink Condition 15
Retains temperature of drink 13 5 65 5 65 5 65 1 13 5 65 5 65 5 65
Prevents water from getting in 2 5 10 7 14 5 0 5 10 5 10 5 0 5 0
Survives Boating Environment 5
Doesn’t break when dropped 1 6 6 6 6 9 9 7 7 5 5 9 9 6 6
Resists corrosion from sea spray 2 7 14 7 14 8 6 8 16 5 10 9 8 7 4
Floats when it falls in water 2 5 10 6 12 8 6 4 8 5 10 8 6 7 4
Keeps Drink Container Stable 20
Prevents spilling 7 3 21 4 28 3 21 5 35 5 35 3 21 3 21
Prevents bouncing in waves 6 7 42 8 48 7 l 2 5 3O 5 3O 7 l 2 7 l 2
Will not slide during pitch/roll 7 5 35 5 35 5 35 5 35 5 35 5 35 5 35
Requires Little Maintenance 5
Easily stored when not in use 1 7 7 6 6 8 8 9 9 4 4 8 8 7 7
Easy to maintain a clean 2 6 12 6 12 3 6 4 8 5 10 5 10 6 12
appearance
Allows liquid to drain 2 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10
out bottom
Easy to Use 15
Usable with one hand 5 7 35 7 35 7 35 6 30 5 25 7 35 7 35
Easy/comfortable to grip 5 8 40 8 40 6 30 5 25 5 25 6 30 8 40
Easy to exchange beverage 2 5 10 5 10 5 10 8 16 5 0 5 10 5 10
containers
Works reliably 3 3 9 3 9 3 9 3 9 4 2 4 12 3 9
Attractive in Environment 10
Doesn’t damage boat surface 5 8 40 8 40 8 40 8 40 8 l 0 6 30 8 40
Attractive to look at 5 7 35 8 40 3 15 4 20 5 25 5 25 8 40
Manufacturing Ease 10
Low—cost materials 4 5 20 4 16 7 28 8 32 4 6 8 32 6 24
Low complexity of parts 3 4 12 3 9 7 21 4 12 3 9 8 24 5 15
Low number of assembly steps 3 5 15 5 15 8 24 3 9 3 9 8 24 6 18
Total Score 578 594 585 484 5 0 556 587
Rank 4 1 3 7 6 5 2CHAPTER NINE

Concept Testing

 

Courtesy of emPower Corporation

EXHIBIT 9-1

A prototype of emPower Corporation’s electric scooter product concept.

165166 Chapter 9

 
    
     
   
   
    

Mission
Statemen-

    
   
 

Identify
Customer
Needs

   
    
      
  

         
     
  

       
     
  

         
     
   

Development
Plan

        

Test
Product
Concept(s)

Generate
Product
Concepts

Establish
Target
Specification

Set
Final
Specifications

Plan
Downstream
Development

              

      
  

Product
Concept(s)

Perform Economic Analysis

Benchmark Competitive Products

Build and Test Models and Prototypes

EXHIBIT 9-2 Concept testing in relation to other concept development activities.

The emPower Corporation, a start-up company, had developed a new product concept to
address the personal transportation market. Exhibit 9-1 shows a photograph of a proto-
type of the product. The concept was a three-wheeled electric-powered scooter that could
be folded up and carried easily. emPower wished to assess the customer response to this
concept in order to decide whether to proceed with its development and to support the
company’s financing efforts.

In this chapter, we focus primarily on testing done during the concept development
phase. In a concept test, the development team solicits a response to a description of the
product concept from potential customers in the target market. This type of testing may
be used to select which of two or more concepts should be pursued, to gather information
from potential customers on how to improve a concept, and to estimate the sales potential
of the product. Note that various other types of testing with potential customers may be
completed at times other than during concept development. For example, some kind of
customer test, usually based on only a verbal description of a concept, may be used in
identifying the original product opportunity that forms the basis of the mission statement
for the project. A test may also be used to refine the demand forecast after the develop-
ment of a product is nearly complete, but before a firm commits to full production and
launch.

Exhibit 9-2 shows concept testing relative to other concept development activities.
Concept testing is closely related to concept selection (Chapter 8) in that both activities
aim to further narrow the set of concepts under consideration. However, concept testing
is distinct in that it is based on data gathered directly from potential customers and relies
to a lesser degree on judgments made by the development team. The reason that concept
testing generally follows concept selection is that a team cannot feasibly test more than
a few concepts directly with potential customers. As a result, the team must first narrow
the set of alternatives under consideration to very few. Concept testing is also closely re-
lated to prototyping (Chapter 14), because concept testing invariably involves some kind
of representation of the product concept, often a prototype. One of the end results of a
concept test may be an estimate of how many units of the product the company is likely to
sell. This forecast is a key element of the information used in making an economic analy-
sis of the product (Chapter 17).

A team may choose not to do any concept testing at all if the time required to test the
concept is large relative to the product life cycles in the product category, or if the cost of
testing is large relative to the cost of actually launching the product. For example, in the
Internet software business, some observers and practitioners argue that just launching aConcept Testing 1 67

product and iteratively refining it with subsequent product generations is a better strategy
than carefully testing a concept before developing it fully. While perhaps appropriate for
some products, this strategy would be foolish in the development of, for example, a new
commercial airplane, where development costs and time are huge and failure can be di-
sastrous. Most product categories fall between these extremes, and in most cases some
form of concept testing is warranted.

This chapter presents a seven-step method for testing product concepts:

. Define the purpose of the concept test.
. Choose a survey population.

. Choose a survey format.
Communicate the concept.

Measure customer response.

Interpret the results.

\Iesnewwe‘

. Reﬂect on the results and the process.

We illustrate this method with the scooter example.

Step 1: Define the Purpose of the Concept Test

As a first step in concept testing, we recommend that the team explicitly articulate in
writing the questions that the team wishes to answer with the test. Concept testing is es-
sentially an experimental activity, and as with any experiment, knowing the purpose of
the experiment is essential to designing an effective experimental method. This step is
closely analogous to “defining the purpose” in prototyping. (See Chapter 14, Prototyp-
ing.) The primary questions addressed in concept testing are typically:

0 Which of several alternative concepts should be pursued?

° How can the concept be improved to better meet customer needs?
0 Approximately how many units are likely to be sold?

° Should development be continued?

Step 2: Choose a Survey Population

An assumption underlying the concept test is that the population of potential custom-
ers surveyed reﬂects that of the target market for the product. If the survey population is
either more or less enthusiastic about the product than will be the eventual target audience
for the product, then inferences based on the concept test will be biased. As a result, the
team should choose a survey population that mirrors the target market in as many ways as
possible. In the actual survey, the first few questions are called the screener questions and
generally are used to verify that the respondent fits the definition of the target market for
the product.

Often a product addresses multiple market segments. In such cases, an accurate
concept test requires that potential customers from each target segment be surveyed.
Surveying every possible segment may be prohibitively expensive in cost or time, and in168 Chapter 9

EXHIBIT 9-3

Factors leading
to relatively
smaller or larger
survey sample
sizes.

 

Factors Favoring a Smaller Factors Favoring a Larger

Sample Size Sample Size

' Test occurs early in concept development ' Test occurs later in concept development
process. process.

. Test is primarily intended to gather ' Test is primarily intended to assess demand
qualitative data. quantitatively.

' Surveying potential customers is relatively . Surveying customers is relatively fast and
costly in time or money. inexpensive.

' Required investment to develop and launch ' Required investment to develop and launch
the product is relatively small. the product is relatively high.

. A relatively large fraction of the target ' A relatively small fraction of the target
market is expected to value the product market is expected to value the product (i.e.,
(i.e., many positively inclined respondents many people have to be sampled to reliably
can be found without a large sample). estimate the fraction that values the product).

 

such cases, the team may choose to survey potential customers from only the largest seg-
ment. However, when only one segment is sampled, inferences about the response of the
entire market are likely to be biased.

For the scooter, there were two primary consumer segments: college students and
urban commuters. The team decided to form a survey population from both segments.
The team had also identified several smaller secondary segments, including transporta-
tion for factory and airport employees.

The sample size of the survey should be large enough that the team’s confidence in
the results is high enough to guide decision making. Sample sizes for concept testing
are sometimes as small as 10 (e.g., when gathering qualitative feedback on a new surgi-
cal device for a highly specialized procedure) or as large as 1,000 (e.g., when trying to
quantitatively assess the potential demand for a new portable telephone that is targeted
at a market segment comprising 10 million households). Although there are no simple
formulas for determining sample size, some of the factors driving sample size are shown
in Exhibit 9-3.

Depending on the desired data to be collected from the concept-testing process, the
team may actually structure multiple surveys with different objectives. Each of these sur-
veys may involve a different sample population and a different sample size. The emPower
team performed two different concept tests. In early concept testing, the team sampled
only a dozen or so potential customers to solicit feedback on the attractiveness of the
basic concept. Later, the team performed a purchase-intent survey of 1,000 customers.
This survey was used to make a demand forecast on which financing decisions were
based. Because of the importance of this objective, the team felt that the time and expense
associated with such a large sample were justified.

Step 3: Choose a Survey Format

The following formats are commonly used in concept testing:

° Face-to-face interaction: In this format, an interviewer interacts directly with the
respondent. Face-to-face interactions can take the form of intercepts (i.e., stopping
people at a mall, in a park, or on a city street), interviews prearranged by telephone,Concept Testing 1 69

interviews with potential customers at a trade-show booth, or focus groups (i.e., prear-
ranged group discussions with 6—12 people).

° Telephone: Telephone interviews may be prearranged and targeted at very specific
individuals (e.g., pediatric dentists) or may be “cold calls” of consumers from a target
population.

° Postal mail: In mail surveys, concept-testing materials are sent and respondents are
asked to return a completed form. Postal surveys are somewhat slower than other
methods and suffer from relatively poor response rates. Some kind of incentive—often
cash or a gift—is sometimes offered to increase response.

° Electronic mail: Electronic mail surveys are very similar to postal mail surveys, ex-
cept that (as of this writing) respondents seem slightly more likely to reply than via
postal mail. With the proliferation of unwanted e-mail, this tendency may not persist.
Many electronic mail users react extremely negatively to unsolicited commercial cor-
respondence. We therefore recommend that electronic mail surveys be used only when
respondents are likely to perceive a benefit to their participation, or when the team has
already established some kind of positive relationship with the target population.

° Internet: Using the Internet, a team may create a virtual concept-testing site in which
survey participants can observe concepts and provide responses. An electronic mail
message is usually used to recruit respondents to visit the test site.

Each of these formats presents risks of sample bias. For example, the use of electronic
formats may bias the sample toward those who are technologically sophisticated. For
some products, this sophistication is part of the profile of the target market (e.g., the tar-
get market for Internet software products is likely to be comfortable with electronic sur-
vey formats). Conversely, an Internet survey might be a particularly bad format for testing
a television-based computer concept targeted at people without personal computers.

Exploratory testing, typical in the early phases of concept development, benefits from
open-ended interactive formats. We recommend that the team use face-to-face formats
when presenting multiple concept alternatives or when soliciting ideas for improving a
concept. In these settings, the product developers themselves benefit from performing the
interviews because they can directly observe reactions to the product in rich detail. As the
purpose of the concept test becomes more focused, more structured formats such as mail
and telephone become more appropriate. If the questions are very focused, the team can
hire a market research firm to implement the concept test. When gathering data intended
primarily for use in forecasting demand, third parties are generally used to collect the data
in face-to-face formats. This helps to avoid a sympathy bias—respondents indicating that
they like the concept in order to please an anxious product developer.

Step 4: Communicate the Concept

The choice of survey format is closely linked to the way in which the concept will be
communicated. Concepts can be communicated in any of the following ways, listed in
order of increasing richness of the description.

° Verbal description: A verbal description is generally a short paragraph or a
collection of bullet points summarizing the product concept. This description may be read170 Chapter 9

EXHIBIT 9-4
Sketch of
scooter concept.

 

Sketch by David Wallace

by the respondent or may be read aloud by the person administering the survey. For ex-
ample, the scooter concept might be described as follows:

The product is a lightweight electric scooter that can be easily folded and taken with you
inside a building or on public transportation. The scooter weighs about 25 pounds. It travels
at speeds up to 15 miles per hour and can go about 12 miles on a single charge. The scooter
can be recharged in about two hours from a standard electric outlet. The scooter is easy to
ride and has simple controlsijust an accelerator button and a brake.

° Sketch: Sketches are usually line drawings showing the product in perspective, per-
haps with annotations of key features. Exhibit 9-4 shows a sketch of the scooter concept.

° Photos and renderings: Photographs can be used to communicate the concept when
appearance models exist for the product concept. Renderings are nearly photo-realistic
illustrations of the concept. Renderings can be created with pens and markers or using
computer-aided design tools. Exhibit 9-5 shows a rendering of the scooter created using
computer-aided design software.

° Storyboard: A storyboard is a series of images that communicates a temporal se-
quence of actions involving the product. For example, one of the potential benefits of the

scooter is that it can be easily stored and transported. This scenario is illustrated in the
storyboard in Exhibit 9-6.

° Video: Video images allow even more dynamism than the storyboard. With Video,
the form of the product itself can be clearly communicated, as can the way in which
the product is used. The scooter team used a video in its purchase-intent survey. TheEXHIBIT 9-5
Rendering of
the scooter from
computer-aided
design software.

EXHIBIT 9-6
Storyboard
illustrating
storage,
transportation,
and use
scenarios.

Concept Testing 1 71

 

 

 

 

 

compact storage

portable

transportation

 

Courtesy of emPower Corporation

reduced
”am transit

Courtesy of emPower Corporation172 Chapter 9

EXHIBIT 9-7

Appearance
model of the

scooter concept.

 

Courtesy of emPower Corporation

video showed students and commuters riding prototypes of the product and showed an
animation of the folding mechanism.

- Simulation: Simulation is generally implemented as software that mimics the func-
tion or interactive features of the product. Simulation would probably not be the ideal way
to communicate the key features of a scooter, but in some other cases simulation can be
effective. For example, in testing controls for electronic devices, a visual image of the de—
vice can be created on the computer screen, and the user can control the simulated device
via a touch screen or mouse clicks and can observe simulated displays and sounds.

° Interactive multimedia: Interactive multimedia combines the visual richness of
video with the interactivity of simulation. Using multimedia, you can display video and
still images of the product. The respondent can view verbal and graphical information and
can listen to audio information. Interaction allows the respondent to choose from among
several sources of available information on the product, and in some cases to experience
the controls and displays of a simulated product. Unfortunately, the development of mul-
timedia systems remains expensive and therefore may be justified only for large product
development efforts.

- Physical appearance models: Physical appearance models, also known as
“looks-like” models, vividly display the form and appearance of a product. They are often
made of wood or polymer foams and are painted to look like real products. In some cases,
limited functionality is included in the model. The scooter team built several looks—like
models, one of which was articulated so that the folding feature could be demonstrated.
Exhibit 9-7 shows a photograph of this model.EXHIBIT 9-8
Working

prototype of the
scooter concept.

Concept Testing 1 73

 

Courtesy of emPower Corporation

- Working prototypes: When available, working prototypes, or works-like models, can
be useful in concept testing. However, the use of working prototypes is also risky. The
primary risk is that the respondents will equate the prototype with the finished product. In
some cases, prototypes perform better than the ultimate product (e.g., because the proto-
type uses better, more expensive components such as motors or batteries). In most cases,
the prototype performs worse than the ultimate product and is almost always less visu-
ally attractive than the ultimate product. Sometimes separate works-like and looks-like
prototypes can be used, one to illustrate how the product will appear in production and
the other to illustrate how it would work. Exhibit 9-8 shows a working prototype of the
scooter, which was used in some early concept testing.

Matching the Survey Format with the Means
of Communicating the Concept

The choice of survey format is tightly linked to the means of communicating the product
concept. For example, the team obviously cannot demonstrate the scooter with a working
model using a telephone survey. Exhibit 9-9 identifies which means of communicating
concepts are appropriate for each survey format.

Issues in Communicating the Concept

When communicating the product concept, the team must decide how aggressively to
promote the product and its benefits. The scooter could be described as an “electric-
powered personal mobility device” or as an “exciting new electric scooter that provides174 Chapter 9

EXHIBIT 9-9
Appropriate-
ness of different
survey formats
for different
ways of
communicating
the product
concept.

 

 

Electronic Postal Face-to-
Telephone Mail Mail Internet Face
Verbal description ' ' ' ' '
Sketch ' ' ' '
Photo or rendering ' ' ' '
Storyboard ' ' ' '
Video ' '
Simulation ' '
Interactive multimedia ' '
Physical appearance model '
Working prototype '

 

 

freedom from gridlock.” In our view, the description of the concept should closely mirror
the information that the user is likely to consider when making a purchase decision. If
highly promotional information is used, it can be labeled as a “sample advertisement,”
perhaps supplemented by mock-ups of “magazine articles” or “comments by current
owners” providing additional descriptions of the product.

Researchers and practitioners argue endlessly about whether the purchase price of the
product should be included as part of the concept description. Price is a very powerful
lever on customer response, and, therefore, pricing information can dramatically inﬂu-
ence the results of a concept test. We recommend that price be omitted from the concept
description unless the price of the product is expected to be unusually high or low. For
example, the primary benefit of a concept may be that it provides basic functionality
at a very low price. In this case, price must be included as part of the concept descrip-
tion. Conversely, a product may provide extremely high performance or unique features,
but only at a relatively high price. In this case, price must also be included as part of the
concept description. When the price of the product is likely to be quite similar to existing
products and to customer expectations, price can be omitted from the concept description.
Instead of including price in the concept description, we suggest that the respondent be
asked explicitly what his or her expectation of price would be. If the resulting customer
expectations differ substantially from the team’s pricing plans, then the team may need to
either consider modifications to the concept or repeat the concept test including price as
a product attribute. Because the scooter was a new product category, for which customers
had not developed clear pricing expectations, the emPower team chose to include their
target price as part of the concept description.

Instead of showing a single concept, the team may choose to ask a respondent to select
from several alternatives. This approach is attractive when the team is trying to decide
among several concepts under consideration. A variant on this approach is to present the
concept for the new product along with descriptions and pictures of the most successful
existing products. This approach has the advantage of allowing respondents to directly
assess attributes of the product concept in comparison to those of competitors. Assuming
the products would be equally distributed and promoted, this approach also allows the
team to estimate potential market share. Using a forced-choice survey technique is likely
to be most effective in cases for which there is a narrowly defined product category with
relatively few existing products.Concept Testing 1 75

Step 5: Measure Customer Response

Most concept test surveys first communicate the product concept and then measure
customer response. When a concept test is performed early in the concept development
phase, customer response is usually measured by asking the respondent to choose from
two or more alternative concepts. Additional questions focus on why respondents react
the way they do and on how the product concepts could be improved. Concept tests also
generally attempt to measure purchase intent. The most commonly used purchase-intent
scale has five response categories:

0 Definitely would buy.

0 Probably would buy.

0 Might or might not buy.

0 Probably would not buy.
0 Definitely would not buy.

There are many alternatives to this scale, including providing seven or more response cat-
egories or asking respondents to indicate a numerical probability of purchase.

Exhibit 9-10 shows an example of a survey form for the scooter. This form was de-
signed to be an interview guide for a face-to-face format in which both a brochure and a
working prototype were used to communicate the product concept.

Step 6: Interpret the Results

If the team is simply interested in comparing two or more concepts, interpretation of the
results is straightforward. If one concept dominates the others and the team is confident
that the respondents understood the key differences among the concepts, then the team
can simply choose the preferred concept. If the results are not conclusive, the team may
decide to choose a concept based on cost or other considerations, or may decide to offer
multiple versions of the product. Note that care must be applied in making this judgment
for cases in which manufacturing costs are dramatically different among the concepts
under comparison and in which no price information is communicated to the respondents.
In such cases, respondents may be biased to select the most costly alternative.

In many cases the team is also interested in estimating the demand for a product in the
period following launch, usually one year. Here we present a model for estimating the
sales potential of durables. By durables we mean products that last several years, and for
which there is, therefore, a negligible repeat-purchase rate. These products are in contrast
to consumer packaged goods, like razor blades, toothpaste, or frozen food, for which fore-
casting models must consider rates of trial and subsequent repeat purchase.

Before proceeding with the model, we note that forecasting sales of new products is
subject to a great deal of uncertainty and exhibits notoriously high errors. Nevertheless,
forecasts do tend to be correlated with actual demand and so provide useful information
to the team.

We estimate Q, the quantity of the product expected to be sold during a time period, as

Q=N><A><P176 Chapter 9

 

CONCEPT TEST SURVEY— Electric Powered Personal Transportation Device
lam gathering information for a new transportation product and am hoping that you would be willing to share your
opinions with me.

Are you a college student?_____
<If the response is no, thank the respondent and end the survey.>

Do you live between one and three miles from campus?_______

Do you travel distances of one to three miles between classes or other activities during your day?_____
<If the response is no to this and the previous question, thank the respondent and end the survey.>

How do you currently get to campus from your home: _______

How do you currently get around campus during the day: _______

Here is a brochure for the product. <Show the brochure.>

The product is a lightweight electric scooter that can be easily folded and taken with you inside a building or on
public transportation. The scooter weighs about 25 pounds. |t travels at speeds of up to 15 miles per hour and can
go about 12 miles on a single charge. The scooter can be recharged in about two hours from a standard electric
outlet. The scooter is easy to ride and has simple controls—just an accelerator button and a brake.

If the product were priced at $689 and were available from a dealer on or near campus, how likely would you be to
purchase the scooter within the next year?

Cl Cl Cl Cl Cl

I would definitely not I would probably not I might or might not I would probably I would definitely
purchase the scooter purchase the scooter purchase the scooter purchase the scooter purchase the scooter

 

Would you be interested in test riding a prototype of the product?
<Provide operating instructions and fit the helmet.>

Based on your experience with the product, how likely would you be to purchase the product within the next year?

Cl Cl Cl Cl Cl

I would definitely not I would probably not I might or might not I would probably I would definitely
purchase the scooter purchase the scooter purchase the scooter purchase the scooter purchase the scooter

 

How might this product be improved?
<Ask open—ended questions to elicit feedback on the concept.>

 

EXHIBIT 9-1 0 Example interview guide (abridged) for a concept test of the electric scooter.

N is the number of potential customers expected to make purchases during the time
period. For an existing and stable product category (e.g., bicycles) N is the expected
number of purchases to be made of existing products in the category over the time period.

A is the fraction of these potential customers or purchases for which the product is avail-
able and the customer is aware of the product. (In situations where awareness and availability
are assumed to be separate independent factors, they are multiplied together to generate A.)

P is the probability that the product is purchased if available and if the customer is
aware of it. P is estimated in turn by

P = Cdefinitely X F definitely + Cprobably X F probablyConcept Testing 1 77

F definitely is the fraction of survey respondents indicating in the concept test survey that
they would deﬁnitely purchase (often called the “top box” score).

Fprobably is the fraction of survey respondents indicating that they would probably pur-
chase (often called the “second box” score).

Cdefinitely and Cprobably are calibration constants usually established based on the experi-
ence of a company with similar products in the past. Generally the values of Cdefinitely and
Cprobably fall in these intervals: 0.10 < Cdefinitely < 0.50, 0 < Cprobably < 0.25. Absent prior
history, many teams use values of Cdefinitely = 0.4 and Cprobably = 0.2. Note that these val-
ues reﬂect the typical bias of respondents to overestimate the probability that they would
actually purchase the product.

Among other possible schemes for estimating P is a function that includes the fraction
of respondents in all of the response categories, not just the top two.

For a product associated with an entirely new category (e.g., portable commuter scoot-
ers), the interpretation of these variables is slightly different. In this case, N is the number
of customers in the target market for the new product, and P is the probability of a target-
market customer purchasing the product within a given time period, often a year. Note
that this interpretation is reﬂected in the survey questions in Exhibit 9-10, in which the
respondent is asked to indicate the likelihood of purchase “within the next year.”

To clarify the model, consider these two numerical examples corresponding to two dif-
ferent market segments and possible product positionings for the scooter concept.

Scooter Sold as Single-Person Transportation in Large Factories This is an existing
category. Assume that scooters are currently sold into this market at a rate of 150,000
units per year (N = 150,000). Assume that the company sells the product through a single
distributor that accounts for 25 percent of the sales in this category (A = 0.25). Assume
that results from a concept test with factory managers responsible for purchasing trans-
portation devices indicate a definitely-would-buy fraction of 0.30 and probably-would-
buy fraction of 0.20. If we use a value of 0.4 for Cdefinitely and 0.2 for Cprobably, then

P = 0.4 X 0.30 + 0.2 X 0.20 = 0.16
and

Q = 150,000 X 0.25 X 0.16 = 6,000 units/year

Scooter Sold to College Students This is a new category and therefore poses a much
more difficult estimation challenge. First, what should be the value of N? Strictly speak-
ing (as of this writing) there are very few existing sales of electric scooters to college stu-
dents. However, we could define N several other ways. For example, how many students
purchase bicycles or motor scooters intended for basic transportation of up to two miles.
This number is approximately 1 million per year. Alternatively, how many students must
travel distances of between one and three miles either in commuting from home or travel-
ing between classes or other school activities. This number is approximately 2 million.
Assume that we sample students in this second group, and that we obtain a definitely-
would-buy fraction of 0.10 and a probably-would-buy fraction of 0.05. (Note that these
numbers represent the fraction of respondents that indicate intent to purchase within one
year.) Further assume that the company plans to sell the scooter through bicycle stores
near campuses and advertise in campus newspapers, for the 100 largest college campuses
in the United States. Based on this plan, the company expects that 30 percent of the students178 Chapter 9

in the target market will be aware of the product and have convenient access to a dealer. If
we use a value of 0.4 for Cdefinitely and 0.2 for Cprobably: then

P = 0.4 X 0.10 + 0.2 X 0.05 = 0.05
and
Q = 2,000,000 X 0.30 X 0.05 = 30,000 units in the first year

The results of forecasts based on concept testing should be interpreted with caution.
Some firms, mostly after repeated experience with similar products, have achieved im-
pressive levels of accuracy in their forecasts. While forecasts do tend to be correlated
with actual sales, most individual forecasts exhibit substantial errors. Some of the factors
that can cause actual purchase patterns to differ from the purchase intentions expressed in
surveys include:

° Importance of word-of-mouth: When the benefits of a product are not immediately
obvious, the enthusiasm of existing users may be an important factor in generating de-
mand. This factor is not generally captured in concept testing.

° Fidelity of the concept description: If the actual product differs substantially from the
description of the product in the concept test, then actual sales are likely to differ from
the forecast.

° Pricing: If the price of the product deviates substantially from the price indicated in
the survey, or from the expectations of survey respondents, then forecasts are likely to
be inaccurate.

° Level of promotion: Spending on advertising and other forms of promotion can in-
crease demand for most products. The inﬂuence of promotion is accounted for only
weakly in the forecasting model via the awareness/availability term and via the materi-
als used to present the concept(s).

Step 7: Reflect on the Results and the Process

The primary benefit of the concept test is in getting feedback from real potential customers.
The qualitative insights gathered through open-ended discussions with respondents about
the proposed concepts may be the most important result of concept testing, especially early
in the development process. The team should reﬂect on this evidence as well as on the nu-
merical outcome of its forecast.

The team benefits from thinking about the impact of the three key variables in the
forecasting model: (1) the overall size of the market, (2) the availability and awareness
of the product, and (3) the fraction of customers who are likely to purchase. Considering
alternative markets for the product can sometimes increase the first factor. The second
factor can be increased through distribution arrangements and promotion plans. The third
factor can be increased through changes to the product design (and possibly advertising)
that improve the attractiveness of the product. In considering these factors, a sensitivity
analysis can yield useful insights and aids in decision making. For example, what would
be the impact on sales if the team were able to secure a partnership with a retailer and
therefore increase A by 20 percent?Concept Testing 1 79

In reﬂecting on the results of the concept test, the team should ask two key diagnostic
questions. First, was the concept communicated in a way that is likely to elicit customer
response that reﬂects true intent? For example, if one of the primary benefits of the
concept is its aesthetic appeal, was the concept presented in a way that this aspect of
the product was clear to respondents? Second, is the resulting forecast consistent with
observed sales rates of similar products? For example, if only 1,000 gasoline-powered
GoPed scooters (a competing product) are currently sold to college students each year,
why does the emPower team believe it will sell 30 times as many of its product?

Finally, we note that experience with a new product is likely to be applicable to future,
similar products. The team can benefit from its experience by documenting the results of
its concept testing and by attempting to reconcile these results with subsequent observa-
tions of product success.

 

Summary

A concept test solicits a direct response to a description of the product concept from po-
tential customers in the target market. Concept testing is distinct from concept selection
in that it is based on data gathered directly from potential customers and relies to a lesser
degree on judgments made by the development team.

° Concept testing can verify that customer needs have been adequately met by the prod-
uct concept, assess the sales potential of a product concept, and/or gather customer
information for refining the product concept.

0 Concept testing is appropriate at several different points in the development process:
when identifying the original product opportunity, when selecting which of two or
more concepts should be pursued, when assessing the sales potential of a product con-
cept, and/or when deciding whether to continue further development and commercial-
ization of the product.

° We recommend a seven-step method for testing product concepts:

. Define the purpose of the concept test.
. Choose a survey population.

. Choose a survey format.

. Communicate the concept.

. Measure customer response.

. Interpret the results.

\]O\Ul-I>UJN>—‘

. Reﬂect on the results and the process.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

Crawford and Di Benedetto examine some forecasting models of frequently purchased
goods.
Crawford, C. Merle, and C. Anthony Di Benedetto, New Products Management,
eighth edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2005.1 80 Chapter 9

Jamieson and Bass review methods for interpreting purchase-intent data and discuss the
factors that may explain differences between stated intention and behavior.
Jamieson, Linda F., and Frank M. Bass, “Adjusting Stated Intention Measures to
Predict Trial Purchase of New Products: A Comparison of Models and Methods,”
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 26, August 1989, pp. 336—345.

When forecasting the growth of a new product category, diffusion models, which are
discussed by Mahajan et al., may be useful.
Mahaj an, Vij ay, Eitan Muller, and Frank M. Bass, “Diffusion of New Products:
Empirical Generalizations and Managerial Uses,” Marketing Science, Vol. 14, No. 3,
Part 2 of2, 1995, pp. G79—G88.

Vriens and his colleagues report on a study of the differences in concept testing results
using verbal descriptions and pictorial descriptions of products.
Vriens, Marco, Gerard H. Loosschilder, Edward Rosbergen, and Dick R. Wittink,
“Verbal versus Realistic Pictorial Representations in Conjoint Analysis with

Design Attributes,” Journal ofProduct Innovation Management, Vol. 15, No. 5,
1998, pp. 455—467.

Dahan and Srinivasan show that the results of concept testing using the Internet are very
similar to those using physical models of the product concepts.
Dahan, Ely, and V Srinivasan, “The Predictive Power of Intemet-Based Product
Concept Testing Using Visual Depiction and Animation,” Journal of Product
Innovation Management, Vol. 17, No. 2, March 2000, pp. 99—109.

Urban et al. report on the use of multimedia systems for describing product concepts and
simulating sources of consumer information.
Urban, Glen L., John R. Hauser, William J. Qualls, Bruce D. Weinberg, Jonathan D.
Bohlmann, and Roberta A. Chicos, “Information Acceleration: Validation and Lessons
from the Field,” Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 34, February 1997, pp. 143—153.

Exercises

1. What are some different ways you could communicate a concept for a new user inter-
face for an automotive audio system? What are the strengths and weaknesses of each
approach?

2. Roughly estimate N for the following products. List your assumptions.

a. A sleeping pillow for air travelers.
b. An electronic weather station (monitoring temperature, pressure, humidity, etc.) for
homes.

Thought Questions

1. Why do you think respondents typically overestimate the likelihood that they will pur-
chase a product?

2. When might it not be advantageous to communicate the product concept to potential
customers using a working prototype? Under what circumstances is it better to use
some other format?Concept Testing 1 81

Appendix

 

Estimating Market Sizes

Rough estimates of market size can often be made through comparisons with similar
products or with known sizes of demographic groups. Exhibits 9-11 and 9-12 contain
some numbers that may be useful.

Population of the World

Population of Europe

Population of Asia

Population of North America

Population of South America

Population of Africa

Population of Oceania

Population of the United States

Annual births in the United States

Adults in the United States age 18—24

Higher-education students in the United States

Households in the United States

United States households with income >US$50,000

United States households with income >US$75,000

United States households with income >US$100,000

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

106 107 108 109

Source: US. Government Statistics

EXHIBIT 9-1 1 Approximate population and demographic data as of 201 l.1 82 Chapter 9

Commercial airplane

Electronics manufacturing equipment
Medical imaging equipment

"Cut-and-Sew" fabric product like a backpack
Mountain bike

Gadgets sold through specialty retailers
Luxury sedan

Hand tool

Cordless drill

Sport utility vehicle
Toys

Desktop computers
Coffeemaker

Mobile telephone

Portable music player
Single-use medical device (e.g., syringe)
Inexpensive ballpoint pens

Razor blade cartridge

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 100 1000 104 105 106 107 108 109

Volume (units/year)

Source: Various

EXHIBIT 9-1 2 Approximate annual sales volume of miscellaneous products. These figures represent the volume
of a typical single model produced by a single manufacturer.CHAPTER TEN

Product Architecture

 

Courtesy of Hewlett—Packard Company

EXHIBIT 10-1

Three Hewlett-Packard printers from the same product platform: an office model, a photo model,
and a model including scanning capability.

1831 84 Chapter 10

A product development team within Hewlett-Packard’s home printing division was con-
sidering how to respond to the simultaneous pressures to increase product variety and
to reduce manufacturing costs. Several of the division’s printer products are shown in
Exhibit 10-1. Ink jet printing had become the dominant technology for consumer and
small-office printing involving color. Excellent black and white print quality and near-
photographic color print quality could be obtained using a printer costing less than $200.
Driven by the increasing value of color ink jet printers, sales of the three leading competi-
tors together were millions of units per year. However, as the market matured, commercial
success required that printers be tuned to the subtle needs of more focused market seg-
ments and that the manufacturing costs of these products be continually reduced.
In considering their next steps, the team members asked:

° How would the architecture of the product impact their ability to offer product variety?
° What would be the cost implications of different product architectures?

° How would the architecture of the product impact their ability to complete the design
within 12 months?

0 How would the architecture of the product inﬂuence their ability to manage the devel-
opment process?

Product architecture is the assignment of the functional elements of a product to the
physical building blocks of the product. We focus this chapter on the task of establishing
the product architecture. The purpose of the product architecture is to define the basic
physical building blocks of the product in terms of what they do and what their interfaces
are to the rest of the device. Architectural decisions allow the detailed design and testing
of these building blocks to be assigned to teams, individuals, and/or suppliers, such that
development of different portions of the product can be carried out simultaneously.

In the next two sections of this chapter, we define product architecture and illustrate
the profound implications of architectural decisions using, as examples, the Hewlett-
Packard printer and several other products. We then present a method for establishing
the product architecture and focus on the printer example for illustration. (Note that
the details of the printer example have been somewhat disguised to preserve Hewlett-
Packard’s proprietary product information.) After presenting the method, we discuss the
relationships among product architecture, product variety, and supply-chain performance,
and we provide guidance for platform planning, an activity closely linked to the product
architecture.

What Is Product Architecture?

A product can be thought of in both functional and physical terms. The functional ele-
ments of a product are the individual operations and transformations that contribute to
the overall performance of the product. For a printer, some of the functional elements are
“store paper” and “communicate with host computer.” Functional elements are usually de-
scribed in schematic form before they are reduced to specific technologies, components,
or physical working principles.

The physical elements of a product are the parts, components, and subassemblies
that ultimately implement the product’s functions. The physical elements become moreEXHIBIT 10-2

Two models of
bicycle brake
and shifting
controls. The
product on the
left exemplifies
a modular
architecture;
the product on
the right has a
more integral
architecture.

Product Architecture 1 85

defined as development progresses. Some physical elements are dictated by the product
concept, and others become defined during the detail design phase. For example, the
DeskJet embodies a product concept involving a thermal ink delivery device, imple-
mented by a print cartridge. This physical element is inextricably linked to the product
concept and was essentially an assumption of the development project.

The physical elements of a product are typically organized into several major physi-
cal building blocks, which we call chunks. Each chunk is then made up of a collection of
components that implement the functions of the product. The architecture of a product
is the scheme by which the functional elements of the product are arranged into physical
chunks and by which the chunks interact.

Perhaps the most important characteristic of a product’s architecture is its modularity.
Consider the two different designs for bicycle braking and shifting controls shown in Ex-
hibit 10-2. In the traditional design (left), the shift control function and the brake control
function are allocated to separate chunks, which in fact are mounted in separate locations
on the bicycle. This design exhibits a modular architecture. In the design on the right, the
shift and brake control functions are allocated to the same chunk. This design exhibits an
integral architecture—in this case motivated by aerodynamic and ergonomic concerns.

A modular architecture has the following two properties:

° Chunks implement one or a few functional elements in their entirety.

° The interactions between chunks are well defined and are generally fundamental to the
primary functions of the product.

The most modular architecture is one in which each functional element of the product
is implemented by exactly one physical chunk and in which there are a few well-defined
interactions between the chunks. Such a modular architecture allows a design change to
be made to one chunk without requiring a change to other chunks for the product to func-
tion correctly. The chunks may also be designed quite independently of one another.

The opposite of a modular architecture is an integral architecture. An integral architecture
exhibits one or more of the following properties:

   

Courtesy of Shimano1 86 Chapter 10

XIII,

0 Functional elements of the product are implemented using more than one chunk.
0 A single chunk implements many functional elements.

0 The interactions between chunks are ill defined and may be incidental to the primary
functions of the products.

A product embodying an integral architecture will often be designed with the highest
possible performance in mind. Implementation of functional elements may be distributed
across multiple chunks. Boundaries between the chunks may be difficult to identify or
may be nonexistent. Many functional elements may be combined into a few physical
components to optimize certain dimensions of performance; however, modifications to
any one particular component or feature may require extensive redesign of the product.

Modularity is a relative property of a product architecture. Products are rarely strictly
modular or integral. Rather, we can say that they exhibit either more or less modularity
than a comparative product, as in the brake and shift controls example in Exhibit 10-2.

Types of Modularity

Modular architectures comprise three types: slot, bus, and sectional (Ulrich, 1995). Each
type embodies a one-to-one mapping from functional elements to chunks and well-
defined interfaces. The differences between these types lie in the way the interactions
between chunks are organized. Exhibit 10-3 illustrates the conceptual differences among
these types of architectures.

° Slot-modular architecture: Each of the interfaces between chunks in a slot-modular
architecture is of a different type from the others, so that the various chunks in the
product cannot be interchanged. An automobile radio is an example of a chunk in a
slot-modular architecture. The radio implements exactly one function, but its interface
is different from any of the other components in the vehicle (e.g., radios and speedom-
eters have different types of interfaces to the instrument panel).

° Bus-modular architecture: In a bus-modular architecture, there is a common bus to
which the other chunks connect via the same type of interface. A common example
of a chunk in a bus-modular architecture would be an expansion card for a personal
computer. Nonelectronic products can also be built around a bus-modular architecture.
Track lighting, shelving systems with rails, and adjustable roof racks for automobiles
all embody a bus-modular architecture.

 

Slot-Modular Bus-Modular Sectional-Modular
Architecture Architecture Archltecture

EXHIBIT 1 0-3 Three types of modular architectures.Product Architecture 1 87

° Sectional-modular architecture: In a sectional-modular architecture, all interfaces are
of the same type, but there is no single element to which all the other chunks attach.
The assembly is built up by connecting the chunks to each other via identical inter-
faces. Many piping systems adhere to a sectional-modular architecture, as do sectional
sofas, office partitions, and some computer systems.

Slot-modular architectures are the most common of the modular architectures because
for most products each chunk requires a different interface to accommodate unique
interactions between that chunk and the rest of the product. Bus-modular and sectional-
modular architectures are particularly useful for situations in which the overall product
must vary widely in configuration, but whose chunks can interact in standard ways with
the rest of the product. These situations can arise when all of the chunks can use the same
type of power, ﬂuid connection, structural attachment, or exchanges of signals.

When Is the Product Architecture Defined?

A product’s architecture begins to emerge during concept development. This happens
informally—in the sketches, function diagrams, and early prototypes of the concept
development phase. Generally, the maturity of the basic product technology dictates
whether the product architecture is fully defined during concept development or during
system-level design. When the new product is an incremental improvement on an existing
product concept, then the product architecture is defined within the product concept. This
is for two reasons. First, the basic technologies and working principles of the product are
predefined, and so conceptual-design efforts are generally focused on better ways to em-
body the given concept. Second, as a product category matures, supply chain (i.e., produc-
tion and distribution) considerations and issues of product variety begin to become more
prominent. Product architecture is one of the development decisions that most impacts a
firm’s ability to efficiently deliver high product variety. Architecture therefore becomes a
central element of the product concept. However, when the new product is the first of its
kind, concept development is generally concerned with the basic working principles and
technology on which the product will be based. In this case, the product architecture is
often the initial focus of the system-level design phase of development.

Implications of the Architecture

Decisions about how to divide the product into chunks and about how much modularity to
impose on the architecture are tightly linked to several issues of importance to the entire
enterprise: product change, product variety, component standardization, product perfor-
mance, manufacturability, and product development management. The architecture of the
product therefore is closely linked to decisions about marketing strategy, manufacturing
capabilities, and product development management.

Product Change

Chunks are the physical building blocks of the product, but the architecture of the product
defines how these blocks relate to the function of the product. The architecture therefore
also defines how the product can be changed. Modular chunks allow changes to be
made to a few isolated functional elements of the product without necessarily affecting188 Chapter 10

the design of other chunks. Changing an integral chunk may inﬂuence many functional
elements and require changes to several related chunks.
Some of the motives for product change are:

° Upgrade: As technological capabilities or user needs evolve, some products can ac-
commodate this evolution through upgrades. Examples include changing the processor
board in a computer printer or replacing a pump in a cooling system with a more pow-
erful model.

° Add-ons: Many products are sold by a manufacturer as a basic unit, to which the user
adds components, often produced by third parties, as needed. This type of change is
common in the personal computer industry (e. g., third-party mass storage devices may
be added to a basic computer).

° Adaptation: Some long-lived products may be used in several different use environ-
ments, requiring adaptation. For example, machine tools may need to be converted
from 220-volt to 110-volt power. Some engines can be converted from a gasoline to a
propane fuel supply.

° Wear: Physical elements of a product may deteriorate with use, necessitating re-
placement of the worn components to extend the useful life of the product. For
example, many razors allow dull blades to be replaced, tires on vehicles can usually
be replaced, most rotational bearings can be replaced, and many appliance motors
can be replaced.

° Consumption: Some products consume materials, which can then be easily replen-
ished. For example, copiers and printers frequently contain print cartridges, cameras
take film cartridges, glue guns consume glue sticks, torches have gas cartridges, and
watches contain batteries, all of which are generally replaceable.

° Flexibility in use: Some products can be configured by the user to provide different
capabilities. For example, many cameras can be used with different lens and ﬂash op-
tions, some boats can be used with several awning options, and fishing rods may ac-
commodate several rod-reel configurations.

° Reuse: In creating subsequent products, the firm may wish to change only a few func-
tional elements while retaining the rest of the product intact. For example, consumer
electronics manufacturers may wish to update a product line by changing only the user
interface and enclosure while retaining the inner workings from a previous model.

In each of these cases, a modular architecture allows the firm to minimize the physical
changes required to achieve a functional change.

Product Variety

Variety refers to the range of product models the firm can produce within a particular
time period in response to market demand. Products built around modular product archi-
tectures can be more easily varied without adding tremendous complexity to the manu-
facturing system. For example, Swatch produces hundreds of different watch models, but
can achieve this variety at relatively low cost by assembling the variants from different
combinations of standard chunks (Exhibit 10-4). A large number of different hands, faces,
and wristbands can be combined with a relatively small selection of movements and cases
to create seemingly endless combinations.EXHIBIT 10-4

Swatch uses

a modular
architecture

to enable
high-variety
manufacturing.

Product Architecture 1 89

 

 

 

 

Photo by Stuart Cohen

Component Standardization

Component standardization is the use of the same component or chunk in multiple prod-
ucts. If a chunk implements only one or a few widely useful functional elements, then the
chunk can be standardized and used in several different products. Such standardization
allows the firm to manufacture the chunk in higher volumes than would otherwise be pos-
sible. This in turn may lead to lower costs and increased quality. For example, the watch
movement shown in Exhibit 10-4 is identical for many Swatch models. Component stan-
dardization may also occur outside the firm when several manufacturers’ products all use
a chunk or component from the same supplier. For example, the watch battery shown in
Exhibit 10-4 is made by a supplier and standardized across several manufacturers’
product lines.

Product Performance

We define product performance as how well a product implements its intended func-
tions. Typical product performance characteristics are speed, efficiency, life, accuracy,
and noise. An integral architecture facilitates the optimization of holistic performance
characteristics and those that are driven by the size, shape, and mass of a product. Such
characteristics include acceleration, energy consumption, aerodynamic drag, noise, and
aesthetics. Consider, for example, a motorcycle. A conventional motorcycle architecture
assigns the structural-support functional element to a frame chunk and the power-conversion
functional element to a transmission chunk. Exhibit 10-5 shows a photograph of the
BMW R1100RS. The architecture of this motorcycle assigns both the structural-support
function and the power-conversion function to the transmission chunk. This integral ar-
chitecture allows the motorcycle designers to exploit the secondary structural properties
of the transmission casing in order to eliminate the extra size and mass of a separate190 Chapter 10

EXHIBIT 1 0-5
The BMW

Rl 100RS
motorcycle. This
product exhibits
function sharing
and an integral
architecture with
the design of

its transmission

chunk.

 

Courtesy of BMW Motorcycle Group

frame. The practice of implementing multiple ﬁmctions using a single physical element is
called function sharing. An integral architecture allows for redundancy to be eliminated
through function sharing (as in the case of the motorcycle) and allows for geometric nest-
ing of components to minimize the volume a product occupies. Such function sharing and
nesting also allow material use to be minimized, potentially reducing the cost of manu-
facturing the product.

Manufacturability

In addition to the cost implications of product variety and component standardization
described above, the product architecture also directly affects the ability of the team to
design each chunk to be produced at low cost. One important design-for—manufacturing
(DFM) strategy involves the minimization of the number of parts in a product through
component integration. However, to maintain a given architecture, the integration ofProduct Architecture 1 91

physical components can only be easily considered within each of the chunks.
Component integration across several chunks is difficult, if not impossible, and would
alter the architecture dramatically. Because the product architecture constrains subsequent
detail design decisions in this way, the team must consider the manufacturing implica-
tions of the architecture. For this reason DFM begins during the system-level design
phase while the layout of the chunks is being planned. For details about the implementa-
tion of DFM, see Chapter 13, Design for Manufacturing.

Product Development Management

Responsibility for the detail design of each chunk is usually assigned to a relatively
small group within the firm or to an outside supplier. Chunks are assigned to a single
individual or group because their design requires careful resolution of interactions, geo-
metric and otherwise, among components within the chunk. With a modular architecture,
the group assigned to design a chunk deals with known, and relatively limited, functional
interactions with other chunks. If a functional element is implemented by two or more
chunks, as in some integral architectures, detail design will require close coordination
among different groups. This coordination is likely to be substantially more involved
and challenging than the limited coordination required among groups designing different
chunks in a modular design. For this reason, teams relying on outside suppliers or on a
geographically dispersed team often opt for a modular architecture in which development
responsibilities can be split according to the chunk boundaries. Another possibility is to
have several functional elements allocated to the same chunk. In this case, the work of
the group assigned to that chunk involves a great deal of internal coordination across a
larger group.

Modular and integral architectures also demand different project management styles.
Modular approaches require very careful planning during the system-level design phase,
but detail design is largely concerned with ensuring that the teams assigned to chunks are
meeting the performance, cost, and schedule requirements for their chunks. An integral
architecture may require less planning and specification during system-level design, but
such an architecture requires substantially more integration, conﬂict resolution, and coor-
dination during the detail design phase.

Establishing the Architecture

Because the product architecture will have profound implications for subsequent product
development activities and for the manufacturing and marketing of the completed prod-
uct, it should be established in a cross-functional effort by the development team. The end
result of this activity is an approximate geometric layout of the product, descriptions of
the major chunks, and documentation of the key interactions among the chunks. We rec-
ommend a four-step method to structure the decision process, which is illustrated using
the DeskJet printer example. The steps are:

1. Create a schematic of the product.

2. Cluster the elements of the schematic.

3. Create a rough geometric layout.

4. Identify the fundamental and incidental interactions.192 Chapter 10

Enclose
Printer
Print

Provide
Structural
Support Position

Cartridge
in X-Axis

Position
Paper
in Y-Axis

"Pick"
Paper
Communicate Command
— flow of forces or energy liq/(Lt; Printer

flow of material

 

 

 

— — — — flow of signals ordata
Connect

to
Host

 

EXHIBIT 1 0-6 Schematic of the DeskJet printer. Note the presence of both functional elements (e. g., “Store
Output”) and physical elements (e. g., “Print Cartridge”). For clarity, not all connections among elements are shown.

Step 1: Create a Schematic of the Product

A schematic is a diagram representing the team’s understanding of the constituent
elements of the product. A schematic for the DeskJet is shown in Exhibit 10-6. At the end
of the concept development phase, some of the elements in the schematic are physical
concepts, such as the front-in/front-out paper path. Some of the elements correspond to
critical components, such as the print cartridge the team expects to use. However, some of
the elements remain described only functionally. These are the functional elements of the
product that have not yet been reduced to physical concepts or components. For example,
“display status” is a functional element required for the printer, but the particular ap-
proach of the display has not yet been decided. Those elements that have been reduced to
physical concepts or components are usually central to the basic product concept the team
has generated and selected. Those elements that remain unspecified in physical terms are
usually ancillary functions of the product.

The schematic should reﬂect the team’s best understanding of the state of the product,
but it does not have to contain every imaginable detail, such as “sense out-of—paperProduct Architecture 1 93

condition” or “shield radio frequency emissions.” These and other more detailed func-
tional elements are deferred to a later step. A good rule of thumb is to aim for fewer than
30 elements in the schematic, for the purpose of establishing the product architecture. If
the product is a complex system, involving hundreds of functional elements, then it is
useful to omit some of the minor ones and to group some others into higher-level func-
tions to be decomposed later. (See Defining Secondary Systems, later in this chapter.)

The schematic created will not be unique. The specific choices made in creating the
schematic, such as the choice of functional elements and their arrangement, partly define
the product architecture. For example, the functional element “control printer” is repre-
sented as a single centralized element in Exhibit 10-6. An alternative would be to distrib-
ute the control of each of the other elements of the product throughout the system and
have coordination done by the host computer. Because there is usually substantial latitude
in the schematic, the team should generate several alternatives and select an approach that
will facilitate the consideration of several architectural options.

Step 2: Cluster the Elements of the Schematic

The challenge of step 2 is to assign each of the elements of the schematic to a chunk.
One possible assignment of elements to chunks is shown in Exhibit 10-7, where nine
chunks are used. Although this was the approximate approach taken by the DeskJet team,
there are several other viable alternatives. At one extreme, each element could be assigned
to its own chunk, yielding 15 chunks. At the other extreme, the team could decide that the
product would have only one major chunk and then attempt to physically integrate all of
the elements of the product. In fact, consideration of all possible clusterings of elements
would yield thousands of alternatives. One procedure for managing the complexity of the
alternatives is to begin with the assumption that each element of the schematic will be as-
signed to its own chunk, and then to successively cluster elements where advantageous.
To determine when there are advantages to clustering, consider these factors, which echo
the implications discussed in the previous section:

° Geometric integration and precision: Assigning elements to the same chunk allows
a single individual or group to control the physical relationships among the elements.
Elements requiring precise location or close geometric integration can often be best
designed if they are part of the same chunk. For the DeskJet printer, this would suggest
clustering the elements associated with positioning the cartridge in the x-axis and posi-
tioning the paper in the y-axis.

° Function sharing: When a single physical component can implement several func-
tional elements of the product, these functional elements are best clustered together.
This is the situation exemplified by the BMW motorcycle transmission (Exhibit 10-5).
For the DeskJet printer, the team believed that the status display and the user controls
could be incorporated into the same component, and so clustered these two elements
together.

° Capabilities of vendors: A trusted vendor may have specific capabilities related to a
project, and in order to best take advantage of such capabilities a team may choose
to cluster those elements about which the vendor has expertise into one chunk. In the
case of the DeskJet printer, an internal team did the majority of the engineering design
work, and so this was not a major consideration.194 Chapter 10

 

Enclosure

Enclose
Printer

 

 

 

     
   
   

 

Provide
Structural

Support Position
Cartridge
Chassis in X-Axis

 

Print
Cartridge

User Interface Board

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

|
|
|
Position '
Paper ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ i
in Y-Axis I
.- _ _
| Power Cord
I and "Brick"

 

"Pick" _ _ _ _
Paper

PaperTray Print
Mechanism

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Communicate Command
wrth Printer
Host

Host Driver
Software

 

 

 

Connect
to

Host

 

Logic Board

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 0-7 Clustering the elements into chunks. Nine chunks make up this proposed architecture for the

De skJet printer.

° Similarity of design or production technology: When two or more functional elements
are likely to be implemented using the same design and/or production technology, then
incorporating these elements into the same chunk may allow for more economical de-
sign and/or production. A common strategy, for example, is to combine all functions
that are likely to involve electronics in the same chunk. This allows the possibility of
implementing all of these functions with a single circuit board.

0 Localization of change: When a team anticipates a great deal of change in some ele-
ment, it makes sense to isolate that element into its own modular chunk, so that required
changes to the element can be carried out without disrupting any of the other chunks.
The Hewlett-Packard team anticipated changing the physical appearance of the product
over its life cycle, and so chose to isolate the enclosure element into its own chunk.

° Accommodating variety: Elements should be clustered together to enable the firm to
vary the product in ways that will have value for customers. The printer was to be soldEXHIBIT 10-8

Geometric
layout of the
printer.

Product Architecture 1 95

ﬂ User Interface Board

  

Enclosure
:I

 

_U

 

Print Cartridge

© Roller/Guide

Pa er
/ p '. Paper Tray

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Logic Board Chassis

around the world in regions with different electrical power standards. As a result, the
team created a separate chunk for the element associated with supplying DC power.

Enabling standardization: If a set of elements will be useful in other products, they
should be clustered together into a single chunk. This allows the physical elements of
the chunk to be produced in higher quantities. Hewlett-Packard’s internal standardiza-
tion was a key motive for using an existing print cartridge, and so this element is pre-
served as its own chunk.

Portability of the interfaces: Some interactions are easily transmitted over large dis-
tances. For example, electrical signals are much more portable than are mechanical
forces and motions. As a result, elements with electronic interactions can be easily
separated from one another. This is also true, but to a lesser extent, for ﬂuid connec-
tions. The ﬂexibility of electrical interactions allowed the Hewlett-Packard team to
cluster the control and communication functions into the same chunk. Conversely, the
elements related to paper handling are much more geometrically constrained by their
necessary mechanical interactions.

Step 3: Create a Rough Geometric Layout

A geometric layout can be created in two or three dimensions, using drawings, com-
puter models, or physical models (of cardboard or foam, for example). Exhibit 10-8
shows a geometric layout of the DeskJet printer, positioning the major chunks. Creating
a geometric layout forces the team to consider whether the geometric interfaces among
the chunks are feasible and to work out the basic dimensional relationships among the196 Chapter 10

EXHIBIT 1 0-9
Incidental
interaction
graph.

chunks. By considering a cross section of the printer, the team realized that there was a
fundamental trade-off between how much paper could be stored in the paper tray and the
height of the machine. In this step, as in the previous step, the team benefits from gen-
erating several alternative layouts and selecting the best one. Layout decision criteria are
closely related to the clustering issues in step 2. In some cases, the team may discover
that the clustering derived in step 2 is not geometrically feasible and thus some of the
elements would have to be reassigned to other chunks. Creating the rough layout should
be coordinated with the industrial designers on the team in cases where the aesthetic and
human interface issues of the product are important and strongly related to the geometric
arrangement of the chunks.

Step 4: Identify the Fundamental and Incidental Interactions

Most likely a different person or group will be assigned to design each chunk. Because
the chunks interact with one another in both planned and unintended ways, these differ-
ent groups will have to coordinate their activities and exchange information. In order to
better manage this coordination process, the team should identify the known interactions
between chunks during the system-level design phase.

There are two categories of interactions between chunks. First, fundamental
interactions are those corresponding to the lines on the schematic that connect the
chunks to one another. For example, a sheet of paper ﬂows from the paper tray to the
print mechanism. This interaction is planned, and it should be well understood, even
from the very earliest schematic, as it is fundamental to the system’s operation. Second,
incidental interactions are those that arise because of the particular physical implemen-
tation of functional elements or because of the geometric arrangement of the chunks.
For example, vibrations induced by the actuators in the paper tray could interfere with
the precise location of the print cartridge in the x-axis.

While the fundamental interactions are explicitly represented by the schematic
showing the clustering of elements into chunks, the incidental interactions must be docu-
mented in some other way. For a small number of interacting chunks (fewer than about
10), an interaction graph is a convenient way to represent the incidental interactions.
Exhibit 10-9 shows a possible interaction graph for the DeskJet printer, representing the
known incidental interactions. For larger systems this type of graph becomes confusing,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Enclosure Userlnterface
Board
Styling
V'b t' Thermal
| ralon . - - -
Prlnt Distortlon . Host Drlver
Pa erTra —
p y Mechanism L09": Board Software

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
   
 

Thermal Distortion RF Interference

RF Shielding

 

 

Power Cord

Chassis and "Brick"Product Architecture 1 97

and an interaction matrix is useful instead and can be used to display both fundamental
and incidental interactions. See Eppinger (1997) for an example of using such a matrix,
which is also used to cluster the functional elements into chunks based on quantifica-
tion of their interactions.

The interaction graph in Exhibit 10-9 suggests that vibration and thermal distortion
are incidental interactions among the chunks that create heat and involve positioning mo-
tions. These interactions represent challenges in the development of the system, requiring
focused coordination efforts within the team.

We can use the mapping of the interactions between the chunks to provide guidance for
structuring and managing the remaining development activities. Chunks with important
interactions should be designed by groups with strong communication and coordination
between them. Conversely, chunks with little interaction can be designed by groups with
less coordination. Eppinger (1997) describes a matrix-based method for prescribing such
system-level coordination needs in larger projects.

It is also possible, through careful advance coordination, to develop two interacting
chunks in a completely independent fashion. This is facilitated when the interactions be-
tween the two chunks can be reduced in advance to a completely specified interface that
will be implemented by both chunks. It is relatively straightforward to specify interfaces
to handle the fundamental interactions, while it can be difficult to do so for incidental
interactions.

Knowledge of the incidental interactions (and sometimes of the fundamental interac-
tions as well) develops as system-level and detail design progress. The schematic and the
interaction graph or matrix can be used for documenting this information as it evolves.
The network of interactions among subsystems, modules, and components is sometimes
called the system architecture.

Delayed Differentiation

When a firm offers several variants of a product, the product architecture is a key deter-
minant of the performance of the supply chain—the sequence of production and distribu-
tion activities that links raw materials and components to finished products in the hands
of customers.

Imagine three different versions of the printer, each adapted to a different electrical
power standard in three different geographic regions. Consider at what point along the
supply chain the product is uniquely defined as one of these three variants. Assume that
the supply chain consists of three basic activities: assembly, transportation, and packag-
ing. Exhibit 10-10 illustrates how the number of distinct variants of the product evolves
as the product moves through the supply chain. In scenario A, the three versions of the
printer are defined during assembly, then transported, and finally packaged. In scenario
B, the assembly activity is divided into two stages, most of the product is assembled in the
first stage, the product is then transported, assembly is completed, and finally the product
is packaged. In scenario B, the components associated with power conversion are as-
sembled after transportation, and so the product is not differentiated until near the end of
the supply chain.

Postponing the differentiation of a product until late in the supply chain is called
delayed differentiation or simply postponement, and may offer substantial reductions198 Chapter 10

Scenario A: Early Differentiation

 

:§i;§ﬂ iv

* g/QQAK/

Assembly
Q% A” *

Differentiation Transport Inventory of
Three Models

w
/ °\/

ﬁ©~®emﬂee *

Scenario B: Postponement

Transport Inventory of
One Subassembly

Partial Assembly

Delayed
Differentiation

EXHIBIT 1 0-1 0 Postponement involves delaying differentiation of the product until late in the supply chain. In
scenario A, three versions of the product are created during assembly and before transportation. In scenario B, the three
versions of the product are not created until after transportation.Product Architecture 1 99

in the costs of operating the supply chain, primarily through reductions in inventory
requirements. For most products, and especially for innovative products, demand for each
version of a product is unpredictable. That is, there is a component of demand that varies
randomly from one time period to the next. To offer consistently high product availability
in the presence of such demand uncertainty requires that inventory be held somewhere
near the end of the supply chain. (To understand why this is so, imagine a McDonald’s
restaurant trying to respond to minute-to-minute ﬂuctuations in demand for french fries
if it peeled, cut, and fried potatoes only after an order was placed. Instead, it maintains
an inventory of cooked french fries that can be quickly scooped into a package and deliv-
ered.) For printers, transportation by ship between production and distribution sites may
require several weeks. So to be responsive to ﬂuctuations in demand, substantial invento-
ries must be held after transportation. The amount of inventory required for a given target
level of availability is a function of the magnitude of the variability in demand.

Postponement enables substantial reductions in the cost of inventories because there is
substantially less randomness in the demand for the basic elements of the product (e.g.,
the platform) than there is for the differentiating components of the variants of the prod-
uct. This is because in most cases demand for different versions of a product is somewhat
uncorrelated, so that when demand for one version is high, it is possible that demand for
some other version of the product will be low.

Two design principles are necessary conditions for postponement.

1. The differentiating elements of the product must be concentrated in one or a
few chunks. In order to differentiate the product through one or a few simple process
steps, the differentiating attributes of the product must be defined by one or a few compo-
nents of the product. Consider the case of the different electrical power requirements for
printers in different geographical regions. If the differences between a product adapted for
120VAC power in the United States and 220VAC power in Europe were associated with
several components distributed throughout the product (e.g., power cord, power switch,
transformer, rectifier, etc., all in different chunks), there would be no way to delay differ-
entiation of the product without also delaying the assembly of these several chunks. (See
Exhibit 10-11, top.) If, however, the only difference between these two models is a single
chunk containing a cord and a power supply “brick,” then the difference between the two

IE

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 0-1 1 To enable postponement, the differentiating attributes of the product must be concentrated in one
or a few chunks. In the top case, the power supply is distributed across the cord, enclosure, chassis, and logic board. In
the bottom case, the power supply is confined to the cord and a power supply “brick.”200 Chapter 10

versions of the product requires differences in only one chunk and one assembly opera-
tion. (See Exhibit 10-11, bottom.)

2. The product and production process must be designed so that the differentiat-
ing chunk(s) can be added to the product near the end of the supply chain. Even if the
differentiating attributes of the product correspond to a single chunk, postponement may
not be possible. This is because the constraints of the assembly process or product design
may require that this chunk be assembled early in the supply chain. For example, one could
envision the consumer packaging of the printer (i.e., the printed carton) being a primary
differentiating chunk because of different language requirements for different markets. If
transporting the product from the factory to the distribution center required that the printer
be assembled into its carton, then it would be impossible to postpone the differentiation of
the product with respect to packaging type. To avoid this problem, Hewlett-Packard de-
vised a clever packaging scheme in which molded trays are used to position several dozen
bare assembled printers on each of several layers of a large shipping pallet, which can then
be wrapped with plastic film and loaded directly into a shipping container. This approach
allows differentiation of the carton to occur after the printers have been transported to the
distribution center and the appropriate power supply installed.

Platform Planning

Hewlett-Packard provides DeskJet products to customers with different needs. For
illustrative purposes, think of these customers as belonging to three market segments:
family, student, and small-oﬁ’ice/home-oﬂice (SOHO). To serve these customers,
Hewlett-Packard could develop three entirely different products, it could offer only one
product to all three segments, or it could differentiate these products through differ-
ences in only a subset of the printer components. (See Chapter 4, Product Planning, for
discussion of related decisions.)

A desirable property of the product architecture is that it enables a company to offer
two or more products that are highly differentiated yet share a substantial fraction of
their components. The collection of assets, including component designs, shared by these
products is called a product platform. Planning the product platform involves managing a
basic trade-off between distinctiveness and commonality. On the one hand, there are mar-
ket benefits to offering several very distinctive versions of a product. On the other hand,
there are design and manufacturing benefits to maximizing the extent to which these dif-
ferent products share common components. Two simple information systems allow the
team to manage this trade-off: the differentiation plan and the commonality plan.

Differentiation Plan

The differentiation plan explicitly represents the ways in which multiple versions
of a product will be different from the perspective of the customer and the market.
Exhibit 10-12 shows an example differentiation plan. The plan consists of a matrix with
rows for the differentiating attributes of the printer and with columns for the different ver-
sions or models of the product. By differentiating attributes, we mean those characteris-
tics of the product that are important to the customer and that are intended to be different
across the products. Differentiating attributes are generally expressed in the language ofProduct Architecture 201

 

Differentiating
Attributes

Family

Student

SOHO (Small Office,
Home Office)

 

Black print quality
Color print quality
Print speed
Footprint

Paper storage
Style

Con nectivity to com puter

Operating system
compatibility

 

"Near Laser" quality 300dpi
"Near photo" quality

6 pages/minute

360mm deep x 400mm wide
100 sheets

"Consumer”

USB and parallel port
Macintosh and Windows

 

"Laser” quality 600dpi
Equivalent to DJéOO

8 pages/minute

340mm deep x 360mm wide
100 sheets

"Youth consumer"

USB

Macintosh and Windows

 

"Laser" quality 600dpi
Equivalent to DJéOO

10 pages/minute

400mm deep x 450mm wide
150 sheets

"Commercial”

USB

Windows

 

EXHIBIT 1 0-1 2 An example differentiation plan for a family of three printers.

 

 

Number SOHO (Small Office,

Chunks of Types Family Student Home Office)
Print cartridge 2 "Manet" cartridge "Picasso” cartridge "Picasso” cartridge
Print mechanism 2 “Aurora” series Narrow "Aurora” series ”Aurora” series
Paper tray 2 Front—in front-out Front—in front-out Tall front—in front—out
Logic board 2 "Next gen" board "Next gen" board ”Next gen" board

with parallel port
Enclosure Home style Youth style Soft office style
Driver software 5 Version A-PC, Version B—PC, Version C

Version A—Mac Version B—Mac

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 0-1 3 An example commonality plan for a family of three printers.

specifications, as described in Chapter 6, Product Specifications. The team uses
the differentiation plan to codify its decisions about how the products will be different.
Unconstrained, the differentiation plan would exactly match the preferences of the
customers in the market segments targeted by each different product. Unfortunately, such
plans generally imply products that are prohibitively costly.

Commonality Plan

The commonality plan explicitly represents the ways in which the different versions of
the product are the same physically. Exhibit 10-13 shows a commonality plan for the
printer example. The plan consists of a matrix with rows representing the chunks of the pro-
duct. The third, fourth, and fifth columns correspond to the three different versions of the
product. The second column indicates the number of different types of each chunk that
are implied by the plan. The team fills each cell in the remaining columns with a label for
each different version of a chunk that will be used to make up the product. Unconstrained,
most manufacturing engineers would probably choose to use only one version of each
chunk in all variants of the product. Unfortunately, this strategy would result in products
that are undifferentiated.202 Chapter 10

Managing the Trade-Off between Differentiation
and Commonality

The challenge in platform planning is to resolve the tension between the desire to dif-
ferentiate the products and the desire for these products to share a substantial fraction
of their components. Examination of the differentiation plan and the commonality plan
reveals several trade-offs. For example, the student printer has the potential to offer the
benefit of a small footprint, which is likely to be important to space-conscious college
students. However, this differentiating attribute implies that the student printer would
require a different print mechanism chunk, which is likely to add substantially to the
investment required to design and produce the printer. This tension between a desire to
tailor the benefits of a product to the target market segment and the desire to minimize
investment is highlighted when the team attempts to make the differentiation plan and the
commonality plan consistent. We offer several guidelines for managing this tension.

° Platform planning decisions should be informed by quantitative estimates of cost
and revenue implications: Estimating the profit contribution from a one-percentage-
point increase in market share is a useful benchmark against which to measure the
potential increase in manufacturing and supply-chain costs of additional versions of
a chunk. In estimating supply-chain costs, the team must consider the extent to which
the differentiation implied by the differentiation plan can be postponed or whether it
must be created early in the supply chain.

° Iteration is beneﬁcial: In our experience, teams make better decisions when they
make several iterations based on approximate information than when they agonize over
the details during relatively fewer iterations.

° The product architecture dictates the nature of the trade-off between differentiation
and commonality: The nature of the trade-off between differentiation and commonality
is not fixed. Generally, modular architectures enable a higher proportion of compo-
nents to be shared than integral architectures. This implies that when confronted with
a seemingly intractable conﬂict between differentiation and commonality, the team
should consider alternative architectural approaches, which may provide opportunities
to enhance both differentiation and commonality.

For the printer example, the tension between differentiation and commonality might be
resolved by a compromise. The revenue benefits of a slightly narrower student printer are
not likely to exceed the costs associated with creating an entirely different, and narrower,
print mechanism. The costs of different print mechanisms are likely to be especially high
given that the print mechanism involves substantial tooling investments. Also, because
the print mechanism is created early in the supply chain, postponement of differentiation
would be substantially less feasible if it required different print mechanisms. For these
reasons, the team would most likely choose to use a single, common print mechanism and
forgo the possible revenue benefits of a narrower footprint for the student printer.

Related System-Level Design Issues

The four-step method for establishing the product architecture guides the early system-
level design activities, but many more detailed activities remain. Here we discuss some ofEXHIBIT

1 0-1 4
Specification
of interface
between black
print cartridge

and logic board.

Product Architecture 203

the issues that frequently arise during subsequent system-level design activities and their
implications for the product architecture.

Defining Secondary Systems

The schematic in Exhibit 10-6 shows only the key elements of the product. There are
many other functional and physical elements not shown, some of which will only be
conceived and detailed as the system-level design evolves. These additional elements
make up the secondary systems of the product. Examples include safety systems, power
systems, status monitors, and structural supports. Some of these systems, such as safety
systems, will span several chunks. Fortunately, secondary systems usually involve ﬂexible
connections such as wiring and tubing and can be considered after the major architectural
decisions have been made. Secondary systems cutting across the boundaries of chunks
present a special management challenge: Should a single group or individual be assigned
to design a secondary system even though the system will be made up of components re-
siding in several different chunks? Or should the group or individuals responsible for the
chunks be responsible for coordinating among themselves to ensure that the secondary
systems will work as needed? The former approach is more typical, where specific indi-
viduals or subteams are assigned to focus on the secondary systems.

Establishing the Architecture of the Chunks

Some of the chunks of a complex product may be very complex systems in their own
right. For example, many of the chunks in the DeskJet printer involve dozens of parts.
Each of these chunks may have its own architecture—the scheme by which it is divided
into smaller chunks. This problem is essentially identical to the architectural challenge
posed at the level of the entire product. Careful consideration of the architecture of the
chunks is nearly as important as the creation of the architecture of the overall product. For
example, the print cartridge consists of the subfunctions store ink and deliver ink for each
of four colors of ink. Several architectural approaches are possible for this chunk, includ-
ing, for example, the use of independently replaceable reservoirs for each ink color.

 

Line Name Properties
PWR—A +12VDC, 5mA
PWR—B +5VDC, ‘lOmA Black
. Logic

STAT _ Print Board

Cartridge
LVL ‘lOOKQ—‘l MQ
PRNT1 _ 11
PRNTZ _
PRNT3 _
PRNT4 _
PRNT5 _
PRNTé _
GND

 

 

 

 

_\

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

\OOONO‘U'I-POON

 

 

 

 

 

 

_\
O

 

_\
_\204 Chapter 10

Creating Detailed Interface Specifications

As the system-level design progresses, the fundamental interactions indicated by lines on
the schematic in Exhibit 10-6 are specified as much more detailed collections of signals,
material ﬂows, and exchanges of energy. As this refinement occurs, the specification of
the interfaces between chunks should also be clarified. For example, Exhibit 10-14 shows
an overview of a possible specification of an interface between a black print cartridge and a
logic board for a printer. Such interfaces represent the “contracts” between chunks and
are often detailed in formal specification documents.

 

Summary

Product architecture is the scheme by which the functional elements of the product are
arranged into physical chunks. The architecture of the product is established during the
concept development and system-level design phases of development.

° Product architecture decisions have far-reaching implications, affecting such things
as product change, product variety, component standardization, product performance,
manufacturability, and product development management.

0 A key characteristic of a product architecture is the degree to which it is modular or
integral.

° Modular architectures are those in which each physical chunk implements a specific
set of functional elements and has well-defined interactions with the other chunks.

0 There are three types of modular architectures: slot-modular, bus-modular, and
sectional-modular.

° Integral architectures are those in which the implementation of functional elements is
spread across chunks, resulting in ill-defined interactions between the chunks.

° We recommend a four-step method for establishing the product architecture:

1. Create a schematic of the product.

2. Cluster the elements of the schematic.

3. Create a rough geometric layout.

4. Identify the fundamental and incidental interactions.

0 This method leads the team through the preliminary architectural decisions. Subse-
quent system-level and detail design activities will contribute to a continuing evolution
of the architectural details.

° The product architecture can enable postponement, the delayed differentiation of the
product, which offers substantial potential cost savings.

° Architectural choices are closely linked to platform planning, the balancing of differ-
entiation and commonality when addressing different market segments with different
versions of a product.

° Due to the broad implications of architectural decisions, inputs from marketing, manu-
facturing, and design are essential in this aspect of product development.Product Architecture 205

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

The basic concepts of product architecture and its implications are developed and
discussed in this article.
Ulrich, Karl, “The Role of Product Architecture in the Manufacturing Firm,”
Research Policy, Vol. 24, 1995, pp. 419—440.

Many of the issues involved in establishing a product architecture are treated from a
slightly different perspective in the systems engineering literature. Hall provides an
overview along with many relevant references. Maier and Rechtin discuss the architecture
of complex systems.
Hall, Arthur D., III, Metasystems Methodology: A New Synthesis and Unification,
Pergamon Press, Elmsford, NY, 1989.

Maier, Mark W., and Eberhardt Rechtin, The Art of Systems Architecting, second
edition, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2000.

The linkage between product variety and product architecture is discussed by Pine in the
context of mass customization, or very high variety manufacturing.
Pine, B. Joseph, II, Mass Customization: The New Frontier in Business Competition,
Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 1992.

Clark and Fujimoto discuss the practice of “black box” supplier interactions in their book
on product development in the automobile industry. In this situation, the manufacturer
specifies only the function and interface of a chunk or component and the supplier
handles the detailed implementation issues.
Clark, Kim B., and Takahiro Fujimoto, Product Development Performance: Strategy,
Organization, and Management in the World Auto Industry, Harvard Business School
Press, Boston, 1991.

Alexander and Simon are among the earliest authors to discuss the partitioning of a
system into minimally interacting chunks.

Alexander, Christopher, Notes on the Synthesis of Form, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1964.

Simon, Herbert, “The Architecture of Complexity,” in The Sciences of the Artificial,
third edition, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996. (Based on an article that appeared
originally in 1965.)

Eppinger has developed matrix-based methods to help analyze system architectures based on

documentation of the interactions between chunks and the teams that implement the chunks.
Eppinger, Steven D., “A Planning Method for Integration of Large-Scale Engineering
Systems,” International Conference on Engineering Design, ICED 97, Tampere,
Finland, August 1997, pp. 199—204.206 Chapter 10

Further detail on delayed differentiation and supply-chain performance may be found in
the work of Lee and colleagues.

Lee, Hau L., “Effective Inventory and Service Management through Product and
Process Re-Design,” Operations Research, Vol. 44, No. 1, 1996, pp. 151—159.

Lee, Hau L., and C. Tang, “Modelling the Costs and Benefits of Delayed Product
Differentiation,” Management Science, Vol. 43, No. 1, January 1997, pp. 40—53.

Lee, Hau L., Cory Billington, and Brent Carter, “Hewlett-Packard Gains Control
of Inventory and Service through Design for Localization,” Interfaces, August 1993,

pp. 1—11.

The platform planning method presented in this chapter is derived in part from Robertson
and Ulrich’s more comprehensive discussion.
Robertson, David, and Karl Ulrich, “Planning for Product Platforms,” Sloan
Management Review, Vol. 39, No. 4, Summer 1998, pp. 19—3 1.

Exercises

1. Draw a schematic for a wristwatch, using only functional elements (without assuming
any particular physical working principles or components).

2. Describe the architecture of a Swiss army knife. What advantages and disadvantages
does this architecture provide?

3. Take apart a small electromechanical product (which you are willing to sacrifice if
necessary). Draw a schematic including the essential functional elements. Identify two
or three possible clusterings of these elements into chunks. Is there any evidence to
suggest which architecture was chosen by the development team?

Thought Questions

1. Do service products, such as bank accounts or insurance policies, have architectures?

2. Can a firm achieve high product variety without a modular product architecture? How
(or why not)?
3. The argument for the motorcycle architecture shown in Exhibit 10-5 is that it allows

for a lighter motorcycle than the more modular alternative. What are the other advan-
tages and disadvantages? Which approach is likely to cost less to manufacture?

4. There are thousands of architectural decisions to be made in the development of an
automobile. Consider all of the likely fundamental and incidental interactions that any
one functional element (say, safety restraints) would have with the others. How would
you use the documentation of such interactions to guide the decision about what chunk
to place this functional element in?

5. The schematic shown in Exhibit 10-6 includes 15 elements. Consider the possibility
of assigning each element to its own chunk. What are the strengths and weaknesses of
such an architecture?CHAPTER ELEVEN

EXHIBIT

1 1 -1

Evolution of
Motorola ﬂip
phones. Shown
(clockwise from
top left) are

the MicroTAC
(1989), StarTAC
( l 993), V60
(2001), and
RAZR (2004)
models.

Courtesy of Motorola
Inc.

Industrial Design208 Chapter 1 1

In 2003, Motorola launched a product development effort to augment its very successful
but aging lines of ﬂip-style (or clamshell) mobile telephones with an exciting new prod-
uct. The StarTAC and V—series platforms had each seen several generations of products
released since the early 1990s, eventually including models for every major worldwide
market and standard.

The RAZR design emerged from a product vision to be “thin to win”—considerably
thinner than other mobile telephones on the market and striking in its iconic new form.
This design required a new architecture, entirely distinct from the existing product plat-
forms. Upon its introduction in 2004, customers judged the ultra-thin RAZR design,
shown in Exhibit 11-1, to be just as radical as its Motorola ﬂip-phone predecessors when
they were released.

Sales to early adopters came quickly after a successful market introduction in which
Hollywood celebrities were shown with the product. Surpassing Motorola’s expectations,
RAZR sales reached millions of units within one year of launch. This success can be
attributed to several factors:

° Small size and weight: With its slimmer form factor, the RAZR was “more pocket-
able” than other mobile phone models. The RAZR had a thickness of 14 millimeters
and a weight of 95 grams, making it the thinnest and one of the lightest mobile phones
on the market at the time.

° Performance features: The RAZR featured an integrated VGA camera; a large, backlit
keypad; and a large, bright, color display for new video and graphic applications. In-
stead of a headset jack, the RAZR utilized Bluetooth networking for wireless headset
accessories. Superior signal reception and transmission were achieved with a novel
layout in which the phone’s antenna was positioned below the keypad and away from
the user’s fingers, which can block weak signals.

° Superior ergonomics: The RAZR’s sleek, ergonomic design complemented the human
face. The shape of the handset, particularly the angled position of the display with
respect to the keypad section, conformed to the user for superior comfort. The spac-
ing and position of the buttons on the keypad were based on accepted standards, and
extensive testing allowed for fast and accurate dialing. The folding design allowed the
user to answer or end calls by opening or closing the phone with one hand, aided by a
recess between the two sections of the clamshell. New software for navigation and new
shortcuts for entering text facilitated use of text messaging and other applications.

0 Durability: As with all Motorola products, the RAZR was designed to meet rigorous
specifications. It could be dropped from a height of more than 1 meter onto a cement
ﬂoor or sat upon in the open position without sustaining any damage. The RAZR could
also withstand temperature extremes, humidity, shock, dust, and vibration.

° Materials: The RAZR utilized several advanced materials to enhance both perfor-
mance and appearance. These included a laser-cut keypad with laser-etched patterns,
magnesium hinge, ultra-thin anodized aluminum housing, polycarbonate composite
antenna housing, and chemically annealed glass with a thin-film coating.

° Appearance: The sleek design and metallic finishes gave the RAZR a futuristic look
associated with innovation. Because of its aesthetic appeal and highly recognizable
appearance, the RAZR quickly became somewhat of a status symbol for early adopters
and created strong feelings of pride among owners.Industrial Design 209

The RAZR development team included electrical, mechanical, materials, software, and
manufacturing engineers, whose contributions were instrumental in developing the tech-
nologies and manufacturing processes that allowed the product to achieve its form factor,
performance, and weight. However, without the contributions of industrial designers, who
defined the size, shape, and human factors, the RAZR would never have taken its innova-
tive, ultra-thin form. In fact, the Motorola team could easily have developed “just another
phone,” smaller and lighter than the previous ﬂip-phone models. Instead, a revolutionary
concept generated by the industrial designers on the team turned the project into a dra-
matic success.

Industrial designers are primarily responsible for the aspects of a product that relate to
the user’s experience—the product’s aesthetic appeal (how it looks, sounds, feels, smells)
and its functional interfaces (how it is used). For many manufacturers, industrial design
has historically been an afterthought. Managers used industrial designers to style, or “gift
wrap,” a product after its technical features were determined. Companies would then
market the product on the merits of its technology alone, even though customers certainly
evaluate a product using more holistic judgments, including ergonomics and style.

Today, a product’s core technology is generally not enough to ensure commercial suc-
cess. The globalization of markets has resulted in the design and manufacture of a wide
array of consumer products. Fierce competition makes it unlikely that a company will
enjoy a sustainable competitive advantage through technology alone. Accordingly, com-
panies such as Motorola are increasingly using industrial design as an important tool for
both satisfying customer needs and differentiating their products from those of their com-
petition.

This chapter introduces engineers and managers to industrial design (ID) and explains
how the ID process takes place in relation to other product development activities. We
refer to the RAZR example throughout this chapter to explain critical ideas. Specifically,
this chapter presents:

0 A historical perspective on ID and a working definition of ID.

0 Statistics on typical investments in ID.

0 A method for determining the importance of ID to a particular product.

° The costs and benefits of investing in ID.

0 How ID helps to establish a corporation’s identity.

° Specific steps industrial designers follow while designing a product.

0 A description of how the ID process changes according to product type.

0 A method for assessing the quality of the ID effort for a completed product.

What Is Industrial Design?

The birth of ID is often traced to western Europe in the early 1900s. (See Lorenz, 1986,
for an account of the history of ID, which is summarized here.) Several German com-
panies, including AEG, a large electrical manufacturer, commissioned a multitude of
craftspeople and architects to design various products for manufacture. Initially, these
early European designers had little direct impact on industry; however, their work resulted
in lasting theories that inﬂuenced and shaped what is today known as industrial design.210 Chapter 11

Early European approaches to ID, such as the Bauhaus movement, went beyond mere
functionalism; they emphasized the importance of geometry, precision, simplicity, and
economy in the design of products. In short, early European designers believed that a
product should be designed “from the inside out.” Form should follow function.

In the United States, however, early concepts of ID were distinctly different. While
early European industrial designers were architects and engineers, most industrial design-
ers in America were actually theater designers and artist-illustrators. Not surprisingly, ID
in the United States was often at the service of sales and advertising, where a product’s
exterior was all important and its insides mattered little. Pioneers in US. industrial design,
including Walter Dorwin Teague, Norman Bel Geddes, and Raymond Loewy, emphasized
streamlining in product design. This trend is best evidenced in US. products of the 1930s.
From fountain pens to baby buggies, products were designed with nonfunctional aero-
dynamic shapes in an attempt to create product appeal. The auto industry provides an-
other example. The shapes of European automobiles of the 1950s were fairly simple and
smooth, while US. cars of the same era were decorated with such nonfunctional features
as tailfins and chrome teeth.

By the 1970s, however, European design had strongly inﬂuenced American ID, largely
through the works of Henry Dreyfuss and Eliot Noyes. Heightened competition in the
marketplace forced companies to search for ways to improve and differentiate their prod-
ucts. Increasingly, companies accepted the notion that the role of ID needed to go beyond
mere shape and appearance. Success stories such as Bell, Deere, Ford, and IBM, all of
which effectively integrated ID into their product development process, helped further
this thinking.

By 2000, industrial design became widely practiced in the United States by profes-
sionals in many diverse settings ranging from small design consulting firms to in-house
design offices within large manufacturing companies. Motorola’s industrial designers
comprise a department titled “consumer experience design” and participate fully in all
new product development efforts.

The Industrial Designers Society of America (IDSA) defines industrial design as “the
professional service of creating and developing concepts and specifications that optimize
the function, value, and appearance of products and systems for the mutual benefit of
both user and manufacturer.” This definition is broad enough to include the activities of
the entire product development team. In fact, industrial designers focus their attention
upon the form and user interaction of products. Dreyfuss (1967) lists five critical goals
that industrial designers can help a team to achieve when developing new products:

° Utility: The product’s human interfaces should be safe, easy to use, and intuitive. Each
feature should be shaped so that it communicates its function to the user.

0 Appearance: Form, line, proportion, and color are used to integrate the product into a
pleasing whole.

° Ease of maintenance: Products must also be designed to communicate how they are
to be maintained and repaired.

° Low costs: Form and features have a large impact on tooling and production costs, so
these must be considered jointly by the team.

° Communication: Product designs should communicate the corporate design philoso-
phy and mission through the visual qualities of the products.Industrial Design 21 1

Industrial designers are typically educated in four-year university programs where
they study sculpture and form; develop drawing, presentation, and model-making skills;
and gain a basic understanding of materials, manufacturing techniques, and finishes. In
industrial practice, designers receive additional exposure to basic engineering, advanced
manufacturing/fabrication processes, and common marketing practices. Their ability to
express ideas visually can facilitate the process of concept development for the team. In-
dustrial designers may create most of the concept sketches, models, and renderings used
by the team throughout the development process, even though the ideas come from the
entire team.

Assessing the Need for Industrial Design

To assess the importance of ID to a particular product, we first review some investment
statistics and then define the dimensions of a product that are dependent upon good ID.

Expenditures for Industrial Design

Exhibit 11-2 shows approximate values of investment in ID for a variety of products.
Both the total expenditures on ID and the percentage of the product development budget
invested in ID are shown for consumer and industrial products spanning various indus-
tries. These statistics should give design teams a rough idea of how much ID investment
will be required for a new product.

The exhibit shows that the range of expenditures on ID is tremendous. For products
with relatively little user interaction such as some types of industrial equipment, the cost
of ID is only in the tens of thousands of dollars. On the other hand, the development of an
intensely visual and interactive product such as an automobile requires millions of dollars
of ID effort. The relative cost of ID as a fraction of the overall development budget also
shows a wide range. For a technically sophisticated product, such as a new aircraft, the ID
cost can be insignificant relative to the engineering and other development expenditures.
This does not suggest, however, that ID is unimportant for such products; it suggests
only that the other development functions are more costly. Certainly the success of a new
automobile design is highly dependent on its aesthetic appeal and the quality of the user
interfaces, two dimensions largely determined by ID; yet the ID expense of $10 million is
modest, relative to the entire development budget.

How Important ls Industrial Design to a Product?

Most products on the market can be improved in some way or another by good ID. All
products that are used, operated, or seen by people depend critically on ID for commer-
cial success.

With this in mind, a convenient means for assessing the importance of ID to a particu-
lar product is to characterize importance along two dimensions: ergonomics and aesthet-
ics. (Note that we use the term ergonomics to encompass all aspects of a product that
relate to its human interfaces.) The more important each dimension is to the product’s
success, the more dependent the product is on ID. Therefore, by answering a series of
questions along each dimension we can qualitatively assess the importance of ID.212 Chapter 11

30
Percentage of
Product
Development
Budget Spent
on Industrial
Design, %

20

10

0

EXHIBIT 1 1 -2

 

0 Handheld Medical
Instrument

Handheld Vacuum

0

Desktop Computer
Peripheral

Large-Scale Medical

Handheld OEqu'pmem QMobiIe Phone

Power

Tool Medlcal Imaging

Equipment

0 Industrial Food 0 Automobile Jumbo Jet
Processing Equipment 0 O

 

>

10 100 1,000 10,000 100,000

Total Expenditures on Industrial Design,
$Thousands

Industrial design expenditures for some consumer and industrial products.

Ergonomic Needs

° How important is ease of use? Ease of use may be extremely important both for

frequently used products, such as an office photocopier, and for infrequently used
products, such as a fire extinguisher. Ease of use is more challenging if the product
has multiple features and/or modes of operation that may confuse or frustrate the user.
When ease of use is an important criterion, industrial designers will need to ensure
that the features of the product effectively communicate their function.

How important is ease of maintenance? If the product needs to be serviced or repaired
frequently, then ease of maintenance is crucial. For example, a user should be able to
clear a paper jam in a printer or photocopier easily. Again, it is critical that the features
of the product communicate maintenance/repair procedures to the user. However, in
many cases, a more desirable solution is to eliminate the need for maintenance entirely.

° How many user interactions are required for the product’s functions? In general,

the more interactions users have with the product, the more the product will depend
on ID. For example, a doorknob typically requires only one interaction, whereas a
laptop computer may require a dozen or more, all of which the industrial designer
must understand in depth. Furthermore, each interaction may require a different design
approach and/or additional research.Industrial Design 21 3

° How novel are the user interaction needs? A user interface requiring incremental
improvements to an existing design will be relatively straightforward to design, such
as the buttons on a new desktop computer mouse. A more novel user interface may
require substantial research and feasibility studies, such as the “click wheel” on the
early Apple iPod music player.

° What are the safety issues? All products have safety considerations. For some prod-
ucts, these can present significant challenges to the design team. For example, the
safety concerns in the design of a child’s toy are much more prominent than those for a
new computer mouse.

Aesthetic Needs

° Is visual product differentiation required? Products with stable markets and technol-
ogy are highly dependent upon ID to create aesthetic appeal and, hence, visual dif-
ferentiation. In contrast, a product such as a computer’s internal disk drive, which is
differentiated by its technological performance, is less dependent on ID.

° How important are pride of ownership, image, and fashion? A customer’s perception
of a product is in part based upon its aesthetic appeal. An attractive product may be
associated with high fashion and image and will likely create a strong sense of pride
among its owners. This may similarly be true for a product that looks and feels rugged
or conservative. When such characteristics are important, ID will play a critical role in
determining the product’s ultimate success.

° Will an aesthetic product motivate the team? A product that is aesthetically appealing
can generate a sense of team pride among the design and manufacturing staff. Team
pride helps motivate and unify everyone associated with the project. An early ID con-
cept gives the team a concrete vision of the end result of the development effort.

To demonstrate this method, we can use the above questions to assess the importance
of industrial design in the development of the Motorola RAZR phone. Exhibit 11-3
displays the results of such analysis. We find that both ergonomics and aesthetics were
extremely important for the RAZR. Accordingly, ID did indeed play a large role in deter-
mining many of the product’s critical success factors.

The Impact of Industrial Design

The previous section focused primarily upon the importance of ID in satisfying customer
needs. Next we explore both the direct economic impact of investing in ID as well as its
impact on corporate identity.

ls Industrial Design Worth the Investment?

Managers will oﬁen want to know, for a specific product or for a business operation in gen-
eral, how much effort should be invested in industrial design. While it is difficult to answer
this question precisely, we can offer several insights by considering the costs and benefits.
The costs of ID include direct cost, manufacturing cost, and time cost, described next.214 Chapter 11

 

 

Needs Level of Importance Explanation of Rating
Low Medium High
Ergonomics
Ease of use l Q—l Critical for a mobile telephone because

 

it may be used frequently, may be
needed in emergency situations, and
can be operated by motorists while
driving. The product’s function must
be communicated through its design.

 

Ease of maintenance —0 As with many integrated electronics
products there is very little
maintenance required.

 

 

 

C)

There are many important user
interactions such as entering text,
dialing and storing numbers, sending
and receiving calls, taking photos,
Internet access.

Quantity of user interactions

Novelty of user interactions l O l Design solutions associated with some
of the customer interactions were
straightforward, such as the numeric
keypad, because there is a wealth of
human factors data that dictate the
basic dimensions. However, other
interfaces, such as the one—handed
operation of such a thin phone, were
quite different from earlier models
and therefore required careful study.

Safety l—O l There were few safety issues for ID to
consider on the RAZR itself. However,
because many customers use mobile
telephones in automobiles, a line

of Bluetooth wireless accessories
needed to be designed for safe,
convenient, hands—free operation.

 

 

 

Aesthetics I O |

Th h d d f d |
Product differentiation ere were un re so mo es

of mobile phones on the market
when the RAZR was introduced.
Its appearance was essential for
differentiation.

Pride Of ownership, fashion, I O l The RAZR was intended to be a highly

 

 

or Image visible product used by people for
business and personal communication
in public areas. It had to be stunningly
attractive in everyday use.
Team motivation l O l The RAZR's novel form turned out

to be an important inspiration to the
development team and a selling point
for senior management.

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 1 -3 Assessing the importance of industrial design for Motorola’s RAZR mobile phone.Industrial Design 21 5

° Direct cost is the cost of the ID services. This quantity is determined by the number
and type of designers used, duration of the project, and number of models required,
plus material costs and other related expenses. In 2011, ID consulting services in the
United States cost $75 to $300 per hour, with most of the work being done by junior-
level designers in the lower half of this price range and senior designers contributing
relatively few hours of more strategic work in the higher half of the range. Additional
charges include costs for models, photos, and other expenses. The true cost of internal
corporate design services is generally about the same.

° Manufacturing cost is the expense incurred to implement the product details created
through ID. Surface finishes, stylized shapes, rich colors, and many other design
details can increase tooling cost and/or production cost. Note, however, that many
ID details can be implemented at practically no cost, particularly if ID is involved
early enough in the process (see below). In fact, some ID inputs can actually reduce
manufacturing costs—particularly when the industrial designer works closely with the
manufacturing engineers.

° Time cost is the penalty associated with extended lead time. As industrial designers
attempt to refine the ergonomics and aesthetics of a product, multiple design iterations
and/or prototypes will be necessary. This may result in a delay in the product’s intro-
duction, which will likely have an economic cost.

The benefits of using ID include increased product appeal and greater customer satis-
faction through additional or better features, strong brand identity, and product differenti-
ation. These benefits usually translate into a price premium and/ or increased market share
(as compared to marketing the product without the ID efforts).

These costs and benefits of ID were estimated as part of a study conducted at MIT
that assessed the impact of detail design decisions on product success factors for a set
of competing products in the market (automatic drip coffeemakers). Although the rela-
tion is difficult to quantify precisely, this study found a significant correlation between
product aesthetics (as rated by practicing industrial designers) and the retail price for each
product, but no correlation between aesthetics and manufacturing cost. The researchers
could not conclude whether the manufacturers had priced their products optimally and
could not determine unequivocally if aesthetics of the products enabled manufacturers to
garner higher prices. However, the study suggests that an increase in price of $1 per unit
for typical sales volumes would be worth several million dollars in profits over the life of
these products. Industrial designers asked to price design services for such products gave
a range from $75,000 to $250,000, suggesting that if ID could add even one dollar’s worth
of perceived benefit to the consumer, it would pay back handsomely (Pearson, 1992).

A second study, conducted at the Open University in England, also suggests that
investing in ID yields a positive return. This study tracked the commercial impact of invest-
ing in engineering and ID for 221 design projects at small and medium-sized manufacturing
firms. The study found that investing in industrial design consultants led to profits in over 90
percent of all implemented projects, and when comparisons were possible with previous, less
ID-oriented products, sales increased by an average of 41 percent (Roy and Potter, 1993).
More recent studies have assessed ID effectiveness and the integration of ID into the
product development process and found positive correlations between these ID measures and
corporate financial performance (Gemser and Leenders, 2001; Hertenstein et al., 2005).216 Chapter 11

For a specific project decision, performing simple calculations and sensitivity
analyses can help quantify the likely economic returns from ID. For example, if invest-
ing in ID will likely result in a price premium of $10 per unit, what will be the net
economic benefit when summed over the original market sales projections? Similarly,
if investing in ID will likely result in a greater demand for the product—by, say, 1,000
units per year—what will be the net economic benefit when summed at the original
unit price? The rough estimates of these benefits can be compared to the expected cost
of the ID effort. Spreadsheet models are commonly used for this kind of financial decision
making and can easily be applied to estimate the expected payback of ID for a project.
(Chapter 17, Product Development Economics, describes a method for developing
such a financial model.)

How Does Industrial Design Establish
a Corporate Identity?

Corporate identity is derived from “the visual style of an organization,” a factor that
affects the firm’s positioning in the market (Olins, 1989). A company’s identity emerges
primarily through what people see. Advertising, logos, signage, uniforms, buildings,
packaging, and product designs all contribute to creating corporate identity.

In product-based companies, ID plays an important role in determining the company’s
identity. Industrial design determines a product’s style, which is directly related to the
public perception of the firm. When a company’s products maintain a consistent and
recognizable appearance, visual equity is established. A consistent look and feel may be
associated with the product’s color, form, style, or even its features. When a firm enjoys
a positive reputation, such visual equity is valuable, as it can create a positive association
with quality for future products. Some companies that have effectively used ID to estab-
lish visual equity and corporate identity through their product lines include:

0 Apple Inc.: The original Macintosh had a small, upright shape and a benign buff col-
oring. This design purposely gave the product a nonthreatening, user-friendly look that
has since been associated with all of Apple’s products. More recent Apple designs have
striking lines and innovative styling in silver, black, and white finishes.

° Rolex Watch Co.: The Rolex line of watches maintains a classic look and solid feel
that signifies quality and prestige.

0 Braun GmbH: Braun kitchen appliances and shavers have clean lines and basic colors.
The Braun name has long been associated with simplicity and quality.

° Bang & Oluﬁs‘en a/s: B&O high-fidelity consumer electronics systems are designed
to have sleek lines and impressive visual displays, providing an image of technological
innovation.

0 BM WAG: BMW automobiles, known for luxury features and driver-oriented perfor-
mance, display exterior styling features that have evolved slowly, retaining the equity
associated with the brand.

0 Motorola, Inc.: The original MicroTAC and StarTAC mobile phones were recognized
as Motorola’s leading-edge ﬂip-phone innovations. The later RAZR model also used
a folding clamshell concept in a much thinner form factor, emphasizing Motorola’s
leadership in a rapidly evolving industry.Industrial Design 21 7

The Industrial Design Process

Many large companies have internal industrial design departments. Small companies tend
to use contract ID services provided by consulting firms. In either case, industrial design-
ers should participate fully on cross-functional product development teams. Within these
teams, engineers will generally follow a process to generate and evaluate concepts for the
technical features of a product. In a similar manner, most industrial designers follow a
process for designing the aesthetics and ergonomics of a product. Although this approach
may vary depending on the firm and the nature of the project, industrial designers also
generate multiple concepts and then work with engineers to narrow these options down
through a series of evaluation steps.
Specifically, the ID process can be thought of as consisting of the following phases:

. Investigation of customer needs.
Conceptualization.

Preliminary refinement.

Further refinement and final concept selection.
Control drawings or models.

9MPPPJ"

Coordination with engineering, manufacturing, and external vendors.

This section discusses each of these phases in order, and the following section will dis-
cuss the timing of these phases within the overall product development process.

1. Investigation of Customer Needs

The product development team begins by documenting customer needs as described in
Chapter 5, Identifying Customer Needs. Because industrial designers are skilled at recog-
nizing issues involving user interactions, ID involvement is crucial in the needs process.
For example, in researching customer needs for a new medical instrument, the team would
study an operating room, interview physicians, and conduct focus groups. While involve-
ment of marketing, engineering, and ID certainly leads to a common, comprehensive under-
standing of customer needs for the whole team, it particularly allows the industrial designer
to gain an intimate understanding of the interactions between the user and the product.

Unlike many development efforts, the RAZR project did not rely heavily upon focus
groups or formal market research. Motorola believed that the high level of secrecy sur-
rounding the project, and the difficulty in gaining customer input for next-generation
products, made these techniques impractical. Instead, the team used extensive input from
Motorola employees to understand the evolution of user needs. Marketing personnel
stressed the importance of Motorola’s leadership in form factor and style. Engineering
supplied information on technical limitations involving materials and geometry of com-
ponents. Motorola’s research on consumer perceptions of quality in mobile phones re-
vealed that while light weight was desirable, the phone’s density was also critical, resulting
in a target specification for overall density.

2. Conceptualization

Once the customer needs and constraints are understood, the industrial designers help the
team conceptualize the product. During the concept generation stage engineers naturally218 Chapter 11

focus their attention upon finding solutions to the technical subfunctions of the product.
(See Chapter 7, Concept Generation.) At this time, the industrial designers concentrate
upon creating the product’s form and user interfaces. Industrial designers make simple
sketches, known as thumbnail sketches, of each concept. These sketches are a fast and
inexpensive medium for expressing ideas and evaluating possibilities. Exhibit 11-4 shows
two such sketches from the RAZR project.

The proposed concepts may then be matched and combined with the technical solu-
tions under exploration. Concepts are grouped and evaluated by the team according
to the customer needs, technical feasibility, cost, and manufacturing considerations.
(See Chapter 8, Concept Selection.)

It is unfortunate that in some companies, industrial designers work quite independently
from engineering. When this happens, ID is likely to propose concepts involving strictly
form and style, and there are usually numerous iterations when engineering finds the
concepts technically infeasible. Firms have therefore found it beneficial to tightly coordi-
nate the efforts of industrial designers and engineers throughout the concept development
phase so that these iterations can be accomplished more quickly—even in sketch form.

3. Preliminary Refinement

In the preliminary refinement phase, industrial designers build models of the most prom-
ising concepts. Soft models are typically made in full scale using foam or foam-core
board. They are the second-fastest method—only slightly slower than sketches—used to
evaluate concepts.

Although generally quite rough, these models are invaluable because they allow
the development team to express and visualize product concepts in three dimensions.
Concepts are evaluated by industrial designers, engineers, marketing personnel, and (at
times) potential customers through the process of touching, feeling, and modifying the
models. Typically, designers will build as many models as possible depending on time
and financial constraints. Concepts that are particularly difficult to visualize require more
models than do simpler ones.

The RAZR industrial designers used numerous soft models to assess the overall size,
proportion, and shape of many proposed concepts. Of particular concern was the feel of
the product in the hand and against the face. These attributes can only be assessed using
physical models. A soft model from the RAZR project, made using rapid prototyping
technology, is shown in Exhibit 11-5.

4. Further Refinement and Final Concept Selection

At this stage, industrial designers often switch from soft models and sketches to hard
models and information-intensive drawings known as renderings. Renderings show the
details of the design and often depict the product in use. Drawn in two or three dimen-
sions, they convey a great deal of information about the product. Renderings are often
used for color studies and for testing customers’ reception to the proposed product’s fea-
tures and functionality. A rendering from the RAZR project is shown in Exhibit 11-4.

The final refinement step before selecting a concept is to create hard models. These
models are still technically nonfunctional yet are close replicas of the final design with
a very realistic look and feel. They are made from wood, dense foam, plastic, or metal;
are painted and textured; and have some “working” features such as buttons that push orEXHIBIT
1 1-4

Two quick
thumbnail
concept
sketches (left)
and a more
detailed colored
rendering
(right) showing
evolution of the
RAZR concept.

EXHIBIT

1 1 -5

A soft model
(left) and a hard
model (right)
used by the
RAZR industrial
designers to
study alternative
forms.

Industrial Design 21 9

 

Courtesy of Motorola Inc.

sliders that move. Because a hard model can cost thousands of dollars, a product develop-
ment team usually has the budget to make only a few.

For many types of products, hard models are fabricated to have the intended size,
density, weight distribution, surface finish, and color. Hard models can then be used by
industrial designers and engineers to further refine the final concept specifications. Fur-
thermore, these models can also be used to gain additional customer feedback in focus
groups, to advertise and promote the product at trade shows, and to sell the concept to
senior management within an organization.

Exhibit 11-5 shows one of the several hard models built during the RAZR develop-
ment process. Extensive usability testing was begun with the RAZR hard models. Tests
identified the need for larger keypad buttons on a thinner phone. Designers also realized
the need to locate the volume control buttons on the side of the display housing for easier

 

Courtesy of Motorola Inc.220 Chapter I l

      

‘r‘i‘““‘ﬁ“

r! l__“““—F=F; - _ “-“‘_"—'——=-=_

_ —_ _'I n 1

access when open, rather than on the side of the keypad housing. They also found that this
location required reversal of the +/— functionality of these buttons when the ﬂip is opened.

5. Control Drawings or Models

Industrial designers complete their development process by making control drawings or
control models of the final concept. Control drawings or models document functionality,
features, sizes, colors, surface finishes, and key dimensions. Although they are not de-
tailed part drawings (known as engineering drawings), they can be used to fabricate final
design models and other prototypes. Typically, these drawings or models are given to the
engineering team for detailed design of the parts. Exhibit 11-6 shows one view of the
control model of the final RAZR design.

6. Coordination with Engineering, Manufacturing,
and External Vendors

The industrial designers must continue to work closely with engineering and manufactur-
ing personnel throughout the subsequent product development process. Some industrial
design consulting firms offer quite comprehensive product development services, includ-
ing detailed engineering design and the selection and management of outside vendors of
materials, tooling, components, and assembly services.

The Impact of Computer-Based Tools
on the ID Process

Since the 1990s, computer-aided design (CAD) tools have had a significant impact on
industrial designers and their work. Using modern 3D CAD tools, industrial designers
can generate, display, and rapidly modify three-dimensional designs on high-resolution
computer displays. In this manner, ID can potentially generate a greater number of
detailed concepts more quickly, which may lead to more innovative design solutions.
The visual realism of 3D CAD images can enhance communication within the product
development team and eliminate much of the inaccuracy of the manually generated
sketches historically provided by industrial designers (Cardaci, 1992). Furthermore,
3D CAD systems may be used to generate control models or drawings, and these data
can be directly transferred to engineering design systems, allowing the entire develop-
ment process to be more easily integrated. Exhibit 11-7 shows a 3D CAD model of
the RAZR.

    
 
   

 
    
      

 

  
     

EXHIBIT 1 1 -6

{WWII

  

lF—_'Ei(

"IIHI‘E-wlntunuun

 
  
  
  

    

 

 

Courtesy of Motorola Inc.

Side view of the RAZR control model defining the final RAZR shape and dimensions.Industrial Design 221

 

Courtesy of Motorola Inc.

EXHIBIT 1 1 -7 3D CAD concept image created using Pro/ENGINEER software.

Management of the Industrial Design Process

Industrial design is typically involved in the overall product development process dur-
ing several different phases. The timing of the ID effort depends upon the nature of the
product being designed. To explain the timing of the ID effort it is convenient to classify
products as technology-driven products and user-driven products.

Technology-driven products: The primary characteristic of a technology-driven product
is that its core benefit is based on its technology, or its ability to accomplish a specific
technical task. While such a product may have important aesthetic or ergonomic re-
quirements, consumers will most likely purchase the product primarily for its techni-
cal performance. For example, a hard disk drive for a computer is largely technology
driven. It follows that for the development team of a technology-driven product, the en-
gineering or technical requirements will be paramount and will dominate development
efforts. Accordingly, the role of ID is often limited to packaging the core technology.
This entails determining the product’s external appearance and ensuring that the product
communicates its technological capabilities and modes of interaction to the user.

User-driven products: The core benefit of a user-driven product is derived from the
functionality of its interface and/or its aesthetic appeal. Typically there is a high degree
of user interaction for these products. Accordingly, the user interfaces must be safe,
easy to use, and easy to maintain. The product’s external appearance is often important
to differentiate the product and to create pride of ownership. For example, an office222 Chapter 11

 

Mobile Phone
Super Computer
0 Camera
Laptop Computer Coffeemaker
0 Desktop 0 Wristwatch 0
Computer 0 Office Chair
Hard Disk Drive OAutomobile
4 >
Technology-Driven User-Driven
Products Products

EXHIBIT 1 1 -8 Classification of some common products on the continuum from technology-driven product to user-

driven product.

chair is largely user driven. While these products may be technically sophisticated, the
technology does not differentiate the product; thus, for the product development team,
the ID considerations will be more important than the technical requirements. The role
of engineering may still be important to determine any technical features of the prod-
uct; however, since the technology is often already established, the development team
focuses on the user aspects of the product.

Exhibit 11-8 classifies a variety of familiar products. Rarely does a product belong
at one of the two extremes. Instead, most products fall somewhere along the continuum.
These classifications can be dynamic. For example, when a company develops a product
based on a new core technology, the company is often interested in bringing the product to
market as quickly as possible. Because little emphasis is placed on how the product looks
or is used, the initial role of ID is small. However, as competitors enter the market, the
product may need to compete more along user or aesthetic dimensions. The product’s orig-
inal classification shifts, and ID assumes an extremely important role in the development
process. One classic example is the Apple MacBook laptop computer. The core benefit of
the first Apple laptop was its technology (a highly portable computer using the Macintosh
operating system). As competition entered this market, however, Apple relied heavily on
ID to create aesthetic appeal and enhanced utility, adding to the technical advantages of
subsequent models.

Timing of Industrial Design Involvement

Typically, ID is incorporated into the product development process during the later phases
for a technology-driven product and throughout the entire product development process
for a user-driven product. Exhibit 11-9 illustrates these timing differences. Note that the
ID process is a subprocess of the product development process; it is parallel but not sepa-
rate. As shown in the exhibit, the ID process described above may be rapid relative to the
overall development process. The technical nature of the problems that confront engineers
in their design activities typically demands substantially more development effort than do
the issues considered by ID.

Exhibit 11-9 shows that for a technology-driven product, ID activities may begin fairly
late in the program. This is because ID for such products is focused primarily on packaging
issues. For a user-driven product, ID is involved much more fully. In fact, the ID process
may dominate the overall product development process for many user-driven products.Industrial Design 223

Concept Development _ _
Identification Concept Concept System' Deta_'| DeSIgn, Production Product
of Customer> Generation> Testing Level Testlng, and Ram U Development
Needs >& Selection> Design Refinement p p Process

Technology-Driven Products >

 

 

Planning

 

 

 

Industrial
Design
Processes

 

 

 

User-Driven Products >

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 1 -9 Relative timing of the industrial design process for two types of products.

Exhibit 11-10 describes the responsibilities of ID during each phase of the product
development process and how they relate to the other activities of the development team.
As with the timing of ID involvement, the responsibilities of ID may also change according

to product type.

 

Product Development
Activity

Type of Product

 

Technology-Driven

User-Driven

 

Identification of Customer Needs

Concept Generation and Selection

Concept Testing

System—Level Design

Detail Design, Testing, and
Refinement

 

ID typically has no involvement.

ID works with marketing and
engineering to ensure that
human factors and user—interface
issues are addressed. Safety and
maintenance issues are often of
primary importance.

ID helps engineering to create
prototypes, which are shown to
customers for feedback.

ID typically has little involvement.

ID is responsible for packaging
the product once most of the
engineering details have been
addressed. ID receives product
specifications and constraints from
engineering and marketing.

 

ID works closely with marketing to
identify customer needs. Industrial
designers participate in focus
groups or one-on-one customer
interviews.

ID generates multiple concepts
according to the industrial design
process flow described earlier.

ID leads in the creation of models
to be tested with customers by
marketing.

ID narrows down the concepts
and refines the most promising
approaches.

ID selects a final concept, then
coordinates with engineering,
manufacturing, and marketing to
finalize the design.

 

EXHIBIT 1 1 -1 0 The role of industrial design according to product type.224 Chapter 1 1

Assessing the Quality of Industrial Design

Assessing the quality of ID for a finished product is an inherently subjective task. How-
ever, we can qualitatively determine whether ID has accomplished its goals by consid-
ering each aspect of the product that is inﬂuenced by ID. Below are five categories for
evaluating a product. These categories roughly match Dreyfuss’s five critical goals for ID,
presented earlier in this chapter. We use these categories to develop specific questions,
allowing the product to be rated along five dimensions. Exhibit 11-11 demonstrates this
method by showing results for the RAZR.

1. Quality of the User Interface

This is a rating of how easy the product is to use. Interface quality is related to the prod-
uct’s appearance, feel, and modes of interaction.

0 Do the features of the product effectively communicate their operation to the user?
0 Is the product’s use intuitive?

0 Are all features safe?

0 Have all potential users and uses of the product been considered?

Examples of product-specific questions include:

0 Is the grip comfortable?

0 Does the control knob turn easily and smoothly?
0 Is the power switch easy to locate?

0 Is the display easy to read and understand?

2. Emotional Appeal

This is a rating of the overall consumer appeal of the product. Appeal is achieved in part
through appearance, feel, sound, and smell.

0 Is the product attractive? Is it exciting?

° Does the product express quality?

° What images come to mind when viewing it?

0 Does the product inspire pride of ownership?

° Does the product evoke feelings of pride among the development team and sales staff?

Examples of product-specific questions include:

° How does the car door sound when slammed?
0 Does the hand tool feel solid and sturdy?
° Does the appliance look good on the kitchen counter?

3. Ability to Maintain and Repair the Product

This is a rating of the ease of product maintenance and repair. Maintenance and repair
should be considered along with the other user interactions.Industrial Design 225

 

Assessment Category

Performance Rating

Explanation of Rating

 

1. Quality of the User Interface

2. Emotional Appeal

3. Ability to Maintain and Repair
the Product

4. Appropriate Use of Resources

5. Product Differentiation

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Low Medium High
I A I
I \J I

o—

O

I A I
I V I
I O—l

 

In general, the RAZR was both easy
to use and comfortable. Calls could
be answered by simply opening the
display, numbers and text could be
easily entered using the keypad, and
the functions were readily accessible
using the navigation buttons.

The RAZR's drawbacks included a
keypad that could be difficult to use
for customers with large fingers or
long fingernails. In some markets,
carriers had specified that Motorola
customize the software interface in
ways that negatively impacted usability.

The RAZR had a high emotional

appeal that stemmed from its ultra-thin
form, pocketability, and finishes.

Although maintenance and repair
were not of primary importance to the
customer, the RAZR rated high in this
category. The battery charged very
quickly and could be removed and
replaced easily.

The final design included only those
features that satisfied real customer
needs. Materials were selected for
durability and manufacturability, to
withstand extreme conditions, to
meet environmental regulations, and
to create an attractive appearance.

The RAZR's appearance was clearly
unique. It was easily identified when
viewed in a public area or next to a
competitor's product.

 

EXHIBIT 1 1 -1 1 Assessment of industrial design’s role in the RAZR development project.

0 Is the maintenance of the product obvious? Is it easy?

0 D0 product features effectively communicate disassembly and assembly procedures?

Examples of product-specific questions include:

° How easy and obvious is it to clear a paper jam in the printer?

0 How difficult is it to disassemble and clean the food processor?

° How long does it take to change the batteries in the remote controller?226 Chapter 1 1

4. Appropriate Use of Resources

This is a rating of how well resources were used in satisfying the customer needs. Resources
typically refer to the dollar expenditures on ID and other functions. These factors tend to
drive costs such as manufacturing. A poorly designed product, one with unnecessary features,
or a product made from an exotic material will affect tooling, manufacturing processes, as-
sembly processes, and the like. This category asks whether these investments were well spent.

° How well were resources used to satisfy the customer requirements?
0 Is the material selection appropriate (in terms of cost and quality)?

° Is the product over- or underdesigned (does it have features that are unnecessary or
neglected)?

0 Were environmental/ecological factors considered?

5. Product Differentiation

This is a rating of a product’s uniqueness and consistency with the corporate identity. This
differentiation arises predominantly from appearance.

° Will a customer who sees the product in a store be able to identify it because of its
appearance?

0 Will it be remembered by a consumer who has seen it in an advertisement?
0 Will it be recognized when seen on the street?
0 Does the product fit with or enhance the corporate identity?

From an ID perspective, as shown in Exhibit 11-1 1, the RAZR was an excellent product.
It was novel, recognizable, durable, easy to fabricate, and had strong customer appeal.
Since these features were extremely important to the consumer, ID played a critical role
in determining the immediate market success of the product.

 

Summary

This chapter introduces the topic of industrial design, explains its benefits to product
quality, and illustrates how the ID process takes place.

0 The primary mission of ID is to design the aspects of a product that relate to the user:
aesthetics and ergonomics.

0 Most products can benefit in some way or another from ID. The more a product is seen
or used by people, the more it will depend on good ID for its success.

° For products that are characterized by a high degree of user interaction and the need
for aesthetic appeal, ID should be involved throughout the product development pro-
cess. Early involvement of industrial designers will ensure that critical aesthetic and
user requirements will not be overlooked or ignored by the technical staff.

° When a product’s success relies more on technology, ID can be integrated into the
development process later.

0 Active involvement of ID on the product development team can help to promote good
communication between functional groups. Such communication facilitates coordina-
tion and ultimately translates into higher-quality products.Industrial Design 227

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

For more information about industrial design—its history, impact, future, and practice—
the following books and articles are recommended. The brief history of ID presented in
this chapter was adapted from Lorenz’s book.
Caplan, Ralph, By Design: Why T here Are No Locks on the Bathroom Doors in the
Hotel Louis XI V and Other Object Lessons, St. Martin’s Press, New York, 1982.

Dreyfuss, Henry, “The Industrial Designer and the Businessman,” Harvard Business
Review, November 1950, pp. 77—85.

Dreyfuss, Henry, Designing for People, Paragraphic Books, New York, 1967.

Harkins, Jack, “The Role of Industrial Design in Developing Medical Devices,”
Medical Device and Diagnostic Industry, September 1992, pp. 51—54, 94—97.

Lorenz, Christopher, The Design Dimension: Product Strategy and the Challenge of
Global Marketing, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, UK, 1986.

Lucie-Smith, Edward, A History of Industrial Design, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New
York, 1983.

Norman discusses good and bad examples of product design across a range of consumer

products and provides principles and guidelines for good design practice. In Emotional

Design, he explains how people connect with and react to the products they buy and use.
Norman, Donald A., The Design of Everyday Things, Doubleday, New York, 1990.

Norman, Donald A., Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things,
Basic Books, New York, 2004.

Boatwright and Cagan argue that many successful products are designed to connect with
customers through strong, positive emotions.
Boatwright, Peter, and Jonathan Cagan, Built to Love: Creating Products That
Captivate Customers, Berrett-Koehler, San Francisco, 2010.

Computer-aided industrial design (CAID), introduced in this article by Cardaci, has become

an important part of ID practice today, replacing traditional rendering in many situations.
Cardaci, Kitty, “CAID: A Tool for the Flexible Organization,” Design Management
Journal, Design Management Institute, Boston, Vol. 3, No. 2, Spring 1992, pp. 72—75.

The following studies are among the very few that have critically assessed the value of ID

to products and their manufacturers. A 1994 issue of Design Management Journal and a

2005 issue of Journal of Product Innovation Management were devoted to this topic.
Design Management Journal, Vol. 5, No. 2, Spring 1994.

Gemser, Gerda, and Mark A. A. M. Leenders, “How Integrating Industrial Design
in the Product Development Process Impacts on Company Performance,” Journal of
Product Innovation Management, Vol. 18, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 28—38.

Hertenstein, Julie H., Marjorie B. Platt, and Robert W. Veryzer, “The Impact
of Industrial Design Effectiveness on Corporate Financial Performance,”

Journal of Product Innovation Management, Vol. 22, No. 1, January 2005,
pp. 3—21.

Journal of Product Innovation Management, Vol. 22, No. 1, January 2005.228 Chapter 11

Pearson, Scott, “Using Product Archaeology to Understand the Dimensions of Design
Decision Making,” S. M. Thesis, MIT Sloan School of Management, May 1992.

Roy, Robin, and Stephen Potter, “The Commercial Impacts of Investment in Design,”
Design Studies, Vol. 14, No. 2, April 1993, pp. 171—193.

Olins describes how a firm develops a corporate identity through design and
communication.
Olins, Wally, Corporate Identity: Making Business Strategy Visible through Design,
Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 1989.

Several excellent case studies involving the ID process and product development
issues surrounding ID have been written by the Design Management Institute. Also the
publications @ Issue (semiannually), Innovation (quarterly), and ID. (bimonthly) include
case studies, examples, and discussion of ID practices.

@ Issue: The Journal of Business and Design, Corporate Design Foundation, Boston.

Design Management Institute, Boston, www.dmi.org.

I.D. Magazine, F+W Publications, Inc., New York.
Innovation, Industrial Designers Society of America, Dulles, VA.

While industrial designers are best found through personal referral, IDSA publishes a list
of ID firms and consultants.
Industrial Designers Society of America, Dulles, VA, www.idsa.org.

Exercises

1. Visit a local specialty store (e.g., kitchen supplies, tools, office supply, gifts) and pho-
tograph (or purchase) a set of competing products. Assess each one in terms of the five
ID quality categories as shown in Exhibit 11-11. Which product would you purchase?
Would you be willing to pay more for it than for the others?

2. Develop several concept sketches for a common product. Try designing the product
form both “from the inside out” and “from the outside in.” Which is easier for you?
Possible simple products include a stapler, a garlic press, an alarm clock, a reading
light, and a telephone.

3. List some firms that you feel have a strong corporate identity. What aspects of their
products helped to develop this identity?

Thought Questions

1. By what cause-and-effect mechanism does ID affect a product’s manufacturing cost?
Under what conditions would ID increase or decrease manufacturing cost?

2. What types of products might not benefit from ID involvement in the development
process?

3. The term visual equity is sometimes used to refer to the value of the distinctive appear-
ance of a firm’s products. How is such equity obtained? Can it be “purchased” over a
short time period, or does it accrue slowly?CHAPTER TWELVE

Design for Environment

    

L L

 

Courtesy of Herman Miller, Inc.

EXHIBIT 1 2-1 Three chairs in Herman Miller’s line of office seating products. Shown
(from left to right) are the Aeron (1994), Mirra (2004), and Setu (2009).

229230 Chapter 12

EXHIBIT

1 2-2 The
spine of the
Setu chair is a
combination
of two
polypropylene
materials
precisely
engineered

to ﬂex and
support as the
user moves in
the chair.

In June 2009, Herman Miller, Inc., a U.S.-based office furniture manufacturer, launched
the Setu multipurpose chair. The Setu (named after the Hindi word for bridge) aims to set
new standards of simplicity, adaptability, and comfort for multipurpose seating while
being environmentally friendly. The Setu chair is one product in a very successful line of
office seating, including also the Aeron and Mirra chairs shown in Exhibit 12-1.

Herman Miller designed the Setu chair in collaboration with Studio 7.5, a design firm
based in Germany. Multipurpose chairs, such as the Setu, are used where people sit for
relatively short periods, such as conference rooms, temporary workstations, and collabor-
ative spaces. (This is in contrast to a task chair in which the user sits for longer periods.)
Studio 7.5 found that many chairs in office spaces where people spend from a few min-
utes to a few hours at a time were uncomfortable and misadjusted. Moreover, most chairs
are made with materials and processes that are harmful to the environment. Studio 7.5
recognized a market need for a new and innovative multipurpose chair—one combining
comfort, design for environment, and a compelling price.

The core of Setu is a ﬂexible spine, molded of two polypropylene materials and engi-
neered to achieve comfort for nearly everybody (see Exhibit 12-2). As the user sits and re-
clines, the spine ﬂexes, providing comfort and back support throughout the full range of tilt.
Without any tilt mechanism and with only one adjustment (height), the chair is significantly
lighter weight, less complex, and lower cost than the Aeron and Mirra task chairs.

The Setu chair emerged from Herman Miller’s commitment to minimizing the environ-
mental impacts of their products and operations, and provides a great example of how to
incorporate environmental considerations into the product development process. The Setu
is designed for material recycling and is produced using environmentally safe materials and
renewable energy. The following factors explain its level of environmental performance:

° Environmentally friendly materials: The Setu multipurpose chair consists of envi-
ronmentally safe and nontoxic materials such as 41 percent (by weight) aluminum,
41 percent polypropylene, and 18 percent steel.

 

 

 

Courtesy of Herman Miller, Inc.Design for Environment 231

° Recycled content: The Setu is made of 44 percent recycled materials (by weight, com-
prising 23 percent postconsumer and 21percent postindustrial recycled content).

° Recyclabilitjy: The Setu is 92 percent recyclable (by weight) at the end of its use-
ful life. Steel and aluminum components are 100 percent recyclable. Polypropylene
components are identified with a recycling code whenever possible to aid in returning
these materials to the recycling stream. (Of course, recycling of industrial materials
depends on the availability of such recycling streams.)

° Clean energy: Setu is manufactured on a production line that utilizes 100 percent
green power (half from wind turbines and half from captured landfill off-gassing).

0 Emissions: No harmful air or water emissions are released during Setu’s production.

° Returnable and recyclable packaging: Setu components are received by Herman
Miller from a network of nearby suppliers in molded tote trays that are returned to the
suppliers for reuse. Outgoing packaging materials include corrugated cardboard and a
polyethylene plastic bag, both materials capable of repeated recycling.

Design for environment (DFE) is a way to include environmental considerations in the
product development process. This chapter presents a method for DFE, using the Herman
Miller Setu chair as an example to illustrate the successful application of the DFE process.

What Is Design for Environment?

Every product has environmental impacts. DFE provides organizations with a practical
method to minimize these impacts in an effort to create a more sustainable society. Just as
effective design for manufacturing (DFM) practice has been shown to maintain or im-
prove product quality while reducing costs (see Chapter 13, Design for Manufacturing),
practitioners of DFE have also found that effective DFE practice can maintain or improve
product quality and cost while reducing environmental impacts.

Environmental impacts of a product may include energy consumption, natural resource
depletion, liquid discharges, gaseous emissions, and solid waste generation. These im-
pacts fall into two broad categories—energy and materials—and both represent critical
environmental problems that need to be solved. For most products, addressing the energy
problem means developing products that use less energy and that use renewable energy.
To address the materials problem is not as straightforward. Therefore, much of the focus
of DFE in this chapter is on choosing the right materials for products and making sure
they can be recycled.

During the early stages of the product development process, deliberate decisions about
material use, energy efficiency, and waste avoidance can minimize or eliminate environ-
mental impacts. However, once the design concept is established, improving environmen-
tal performance generally involves time-consuming design iterations. DFE therefore may
involve activities throughout the product development process and requires an interdis-
ciplinary approach. Industrial design, engineering, purchasing, and marketing all work
together in the development of environmentally friendly products. In many cases product
development professionals with specialized DFE training lead the DFE efforts within a
project. However, all product development team members benefit from understanding the
principles of DFE.232 Chapter 12

EXHIBIT

1 2-3 The
natural life
cycle and the
product life
cycle.

Two Life Cycles

Life cycle thinking is the basis of DFE. This helps to expand the traditional manufac-
turer’s concern with the production and distribution of its products to comprise a closed-
loop system relating the product life cycle to the natural life cycle, both of which are
illustrated in Exhibit 12-3. The product life cycle begins with the extraction and process-
ing of raw materials from natural resources, followed by production, distribution, and use
of the product. Finally, at the end of the product’s useful life there are several recovery
options—remanufacturing or reuse of components, recycling of materials, or disposal
through incineration or deposit in a landfill. The natural life cycle represents the growth
and decay of organic materials in a continuous loop. The two life cycles intersect, as
shown in the diagram, with the use of natural materials in industrial products and with the
reintegration of organic materials back into the natural cycle.

While most product life cycles take place over a few months or years, the natural cycle
spans a wider range of time periods. Most organic materials (plant- and animal-based)
can decay relatively quickly and become nutrients for new growth of similar materials.
However, other natural materials (such as minerals), are created on a much longer time
scale, and so are considered to be nonrenewable natural resources. Therefore, depositing
most mineral-based industrial materials into landfills does not readily re-create similar
industrial materials for perhaps thousands of years (and often creating unnatural concen-
trations of certain harmful wastes).

Each of the product life cycle stages may consume energy and other resources and
may generate emissions and waste, all of which have environmental impacts. From this
life cycle perspective, in order to reach conditions of environmental sustainability, the
materials in products must be balanced in a sustainable, closed-loop system. This gives
rise to three challenges of product design to reach sustainability, which are also repre-
sented in the life cycle diagram of Exhibit 12-3.

Nonrenewable
Resources

8 Recycling
ﬂ ‘/ Production

Postindustrial

Renewable

 
    

R Materials
esources
Resources
Postconsumer Remanufacturing
Natural Recycling
"Biological" Product
Natural Life Cycle "| d t ' |"
Decay n us rIa

Life Cycle Distribution

Recovery
T .
OXICS Reuse
Organics
lnorganics Use

    

DepositDesign for Environment 233

. Eliminate use of nonrenewable natural resources (including nonrenewable sources of

energy).

. Eliminate disposal of synthetic and inorganic materials that do not decay quickly.
. Eliminate creation of toxic wastes that are not part of natural life cycles.

Organizations committed to DFE intend to work toward achieving these sustainability

conditions over time. DFE helps these organizations to create better products by choosing
materials carefully and by enabling proper recovery options so that the materials used in
products can be reintegrated either into the product life cycle or into the natural life cycle.

Environmental Impacts

Every product may have a number of environmental impacts over its life cycle. The fol-
lowing list explains some of the environmental impacts deriving from the manufacturing
sector (adapted from Lewis et al., 2001):

Global warming: Scientific data and models show that the temperature of the earth is
gradually increasing as a result of the accumulation of greenhouse gases, particulates,
and water vapor in the upper atmosphere. This effect appears to be accelerating as
a result of emissions of carbon dioxide (C02), methane (CH4), chloroﬂuorocarbons
(CFCs), black carbon particles, and nitrogen oxides (NOX) from industrial processes
and products.

Resource depletion: Many of the raw materials used for production, such as iron ore,
gas, oil, and coal, are nonrenewable and supplies are limited.

Solid waste: Products may generate solid waste throughout their life cycle. Some of
this waste is recycled, but most is disposed in incinerators or landfills. Incinerators
generate air pollution and toxic ash (which goes into landfills). Landfills may also
create concentrations of toxic substances, generate methane gas (CH4), and release
groundwater pollutants.

Water pollution: The most common sources of water pollution are discharges from in-
dustrial processes, which may include heavy metals, fertilizers, solvents, oils, synthetic
substances, acids, and suspended solids. Waterborne pollutants may affect ground-
water, drinking water, and fragile ecosystems.

Air pollution: Sources of air pollution include emissions from factories, power-
generating plants, incinerators, residential and commercial buildings, and motor
vehicles. Typical pollutants include C02, NOX, sulfur dioxide ($02), ozone (03), and
volatile organic compounds (VOCs).

Land degradation: Land degradation concerns the adverse effects that raw material
extraction and production, such as mining, farming, and forestry, have on the environ-
ment. The effects include reduced soil fertility, soil erosion, salinity of land and water,
and deforestation.

Biodiversity: Biodiversity concerns the variety of plant and animal species, and is
affected by land clearing for urban development, mining, and other industrial activities.

Ozone depletion: The ozone layer protects the earth against the harmful effects of the
sun’s radiation. It is degraded by reactions with nitric acid (created by the burning of
fossil fuels) and chorine compounds (such as CFCs).234 Chapter 12

History of Design for Environment

The birth of DFE is often traced to the early 1970s. Papanek (1971) challenged designers
to face their social and environmental responsibilities instead of only commercial interests.
The World Commission on Environment and Development’s Brandtland Report (1987)
first defined the term sustainable development as “development that meets the needs of the
present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.”

In the 1990s, several inﬂuential books about environmentally friendly design were
published. Burall (1991) argued that there was no longer a conﬂict between a green ap-
proach to design and business success. Fiksel (1996; revised 2009) discussed how DFE
integrates life cycle thinking into new product and process development. As the DFE pro-
cess matured, Brezet and van Hemel (1997) provided a practical guide called Ecodesign.
Also in the 1990s the Technical University of Delft, Philips Electronics, and the Dutch
government collaborated to develop a life cycle analysis software tool providing metrics
to assess the overall environmental impact of a product.

Today’s sustainable development movement embraces the broader concept of sustain-
able product design (Bhamra and Lofthouse, 2007), which includes not only DFE but
also the social and ethical implications of products. Even though authors have used vari-
ous terminology for environmentally friendly design approaches, the terms green design,
ecodesign, sustainable design, and DFE are more or less synonymous today.

Herman Miller's Journey toward Design for Environment

Many manufacturing firms have begun to embrace DFE. However, few have done so to
the extent of Herman Miller, where DFE is central to its corporate strategy. Herman
Miller strives to maintain high product quality standards while incorporating increasingly
more environmentally friendly materials, manufacturing processes, and product function
into every new product design.

In 1999, Herman Miller formed a design for environment (DFE) team. This team is re-
sponsible for developing environmentally sensitive design standards for new and existing
Herman Miller products. McDonough Braungart Design Chemistry (MBDC), a product
and industrial process design firm based in Virginia, supports the DFE team in its mis-
sion. McDonough and Braungart (2002) stated in their book, Cradle to Cradle: Remaking
the Way We Make Things, that the traditional DFE approach—designing products that are
merely less harmful to the environment due to incremental improvements such as reduced
energy use, waste generation, or use of toxic materials—is not sufficient because such
products are still unhealthy for the environment. To advance from less harmful to truly
environmentally friendly products, McDonough and Braungart introduced a DFE method
that focuses on three key areas of product design:

° Material chemistry: What chemicals comprise the specified materials? Are they safe
for humans and the environment?

° Disassembly: Can the products be taken apart at the end of their useful life in order to
recycle their materials?

° Recyclability: Do the materials contain recycled content? Are the materials readily
separable into recycling categories? Can the materials be recycled at the end of the
product’s useful life?Design for Environment 235

To implement DFE, Herman Miller has built a team of DFE experts who work on
every new product development team. With MBDC, they have created a materials
database and a DFE assessment tool, which provide metrics to guide design decisions
throughout the product development process.

The Design for Environment Process

EXHIBIT

1 2-4 The
DFE process
involves
activities
throughout
the product
development
process.

Effective implementation of DFE includes activities throughout the product development pro-
cess. The steps of the DFE process are shown in Exhibit 12-4. Despite the linear presentation
of the steps, product development teams will likely repeat some steps several times, making
DFE an iterative process. The following sections describe each step of the DFE process.

 

Product Planning

Concept Development

System-Level Design

 

1. Set DFE
Agenda

 

l

 

2. Identify Potential
Environmental Impacts

 

l

 

3. Select DFE
Guidelines

 

 

 

4. Apply DFE Guidelines
to Initial Designls)

 

 

Detail Design

I

 

5. Assess
Environmental Impacts

 

 

 

 
 

Compare to
DFE Goals

  

 

 
 

6. Refine
Design

 
 
    

 

Process Improvement

l

 

7. Reflect on DFE
Process and Results236 Chapter 12

Step 1: Set the DFE Agenda: Drivers, Goals, and Team

The DFE process begins as early as the product planning phase with setting the DFE
agenda. This step consists of three activities: identifying the internal and external drivers
of DFE, setting the environmental goals for the product, and setting up the DFE team. By
setting the DFE agenda, the organization identifies a clear and actionable path toward
environmentally friendly product design.

Identify the Internal and External Drivers of DFE

The planning phase of DFE begins with a discussion of the reasons why the organization
wishes to address the environmental performance of its products. It is useful to document
both the internal drivers and the external drivers of DFE. This list may evolve over time,
as changes in technology, regulation, experience, stakeholders, and competition each
affect the capability and challenges of the organization.

Internal drivers are the DFE objectives within the organization. Typical internal drivers
of DFE are (adapted from Brezet and van Hemel, 1997):

° Product quality: A focus on environmental performance may raise the quality of the
product in terms of functionality, reliability in operation, durability, and repairability.

° Public image: Communicating a high level of environmental quality of a product can
improve a company’s image.

° Cost reduction: Using less material and less energy in production can result in consid-
erable cost savings. Generating less waste and eliminating hazardous waste results in
lower waste disposal costs.

° Innovation: Sustainable thinking can lead to radical changes in product design and
may foster innovation across the whole company.

° Operational safety: By eliminating toxic materials, many DFE changes can help im-
prove the occupational health and safety of employees.

° Employee motivation: Employees can be motivated to contribute in new and creative
ways if they are able to help reduce the environmental impacts of the company’s prod-
ucts and operations.

° Ethical responsibility: Interest in sustainable development among managers and prod-
uct developers may be motivated in part by a moral sense of responsibility for conserv-
ing the environment and nature.

° Consumer behavior: Wider availability of products with positive environmental bene-
fits may accelerate the transition to cleaner lifestyles and demand for greener products.

External drivers of DFE typically include environmental regulations, customer prefer-
ences, and the offerings of competitors, such as (from Brezet and van Hemel, 1997):

° Environmental legislation: Product-oriented environmental policy is developing
rapidly. Companies must not only understand the myriad regulations in the various
regions where they operate and sell products, but also be able to anticipate futureDesign for Environment 237

legislation. The focus of recent legislation is shifting from the prohibition of certain
materials to broader producer responsibility, including take-back obligations.

° Market demand: Today, companies operate in a business environment of increasingly
well-informed industrial customers and end users who may demand sustainable prod-
ucts. Negative publicity, blogs, and boycotts of products, manufacturers, or retailers
can have considerable impact on sales. Of course, the opposite positive effect is be-
coming more powerful as well.

° Competition: Sustainability activities undertaken by competitors can lead to pressure
for more emphasis on DFE. Setting a high environmental standard may create a first-
mover advantage.

° Trade organizations: Trade or industrial organizations in some branches of industry—
such as packaging and automobile manufacturing—encourage companies to take envi-
ronmental action by sharing technology and establishing codes of conduct.

° Suppliers: Suppliers inﬂuence company behavior by introducing more sustainable
materials and processes. Companies may choose to audit and confirm environmental
declarations of their suppliers.

° Social pressures: Through their social and community contacts, managers and employ-
ees may be asked about the responsibility that their business takes for the environment.

Key DFE drivers for the Setu chair were market demand, innovation, and Herman
Miller’s commitment to environmental responsibility. Studio 7.5 and Herman Miller de-
veloped the early Setu concepts with these drivers in mind.

Set the DFE Goals

An important activity in the product planning phase is to set the environmental goals for
each product development project. Many organizations have established a strategy that in-
cludes long-term environmental goals. These goals define how the organization complies
with environmental regulations and how the organization reduces the environmental
impacts of its products, services, and operations.

In 2005, Herman Miller set its long-term environmental goals for the year 2020:

0 Zero landfill.

° Zero hazardous waste generation.

0 Zero harmful air emissions.

0 Zero process water use.

0 All green electrical energy use.

0 All buildings certified to meet environmental efficiency standards.
0 All sales from products created with the DFE process.

To achieve the long-term goals, specific environmental goals may be set for every prod-
uct during the planning phase. These individual goals also allow the organization to make
progress toward the long-term strategy. Exhibit 12-5 lists examples of DFE goals, arranged
according to the product life cycle. Based on an understanding of which life cycle stages
contribute significant environmental impacts, goals may be developed accordingly.238 Chapter 12

EXHIBIT

1 2-5
Example
DFE goals,
arranged
according to
the product
life cycle
stages.
Adapted from
Giudice et al.
(2006).

 

Life Cycle Stage Example Design for Environment Goals

 

Reduce the use of raw materials.

Choose plentiful, renewable raw materials.

Eliminate toxic materials.

Increase the energy efficiency of material extraction processes.
Reduce discards and waste.

Increase the use of recovered and recycled materials.

Materials

 

Production Reduce the use of process materials.

Specify process materials that can be fully recovered and recycled.
Eliminate toxic process materials.

Select processes with high energy efficiency.

Reduce production scrap and waste.

 

Distribution Plan the most energy-efficient shipping.
Reduce emissions from transport.
Eliminate toxic and dangerous packaging materials.

Eliminate or reuse packaging.

 

Use Extend useful product life.
Promote use of products under the intended conditions.
Enable clean and efficient servicing operations.

Eliminate emissions and reduce energy consumption during use.

 

Recovery Facilitate product disassembly to separate materials.
Enable the recovery and remanufacturing of components.
Facilitate material recycling.

Reduce waste volume for incineration and landfill deposit.

 

 

Herman Miller understands that the primary environmental impacts of their office fur-
niture products are in the materials, production, and recovery stages. For the Setu chair,
Herman Miller aimed to use exclusively materials with low environmental impact, facili-
tate product disassembly, and enable recycling.

Set Up the DFE Team

DFE requires participation by many functional experts on the product development proj-
ect. The typical composition of a DFE team (often a subteam within the overall project
team) consists of a DFE leader, an environmental chemistry and materials expert, a man-
ufacturing engineer, and a representative from the purchasing and supply chain organiza-
tion. Of course, the DFE team composition depends on the organization and needs of the
specific project, and may also include marketing professionals, outside consultants, sup-
pliers, or other experts.

Herman Miller created their DFE team in 1999 to work with the designers and engi-
neers on every product development project to review material chemistry, disassembly,
recyclability, incoming and outgoing packaging, energy sources and uses, and waste gen-
eration. The DFE team is involved as early as possible to ensure that DFE considerationsDesign for Environment 239

are taken into account right from the start. By working closely with each product develop-
ment team, the DFE team provides the tools and knowledge for making environmentally
sound design decisions.

Step 2: Identify Potential Environmental Impacts

Environmental
Impacts

A

 

    
 
   
    
    
       
     
   
       
 
      

biodiversity due
to deforestation

Land degradation from factory

methane and
Emissions and Water pollution Air pollution due groundwater
waste generation from factory to transportation Maintenance and pollutants
from mining discharges emissions cleaning materials
Incineration
Natural resource Waste generation Waste generation Abrasion of generates air
depletion during production from packaging materials pollution and

Within the concept development phase, DFE begins by identifying the potential environ-
mental impacts of the product over its life cycle. This enables the product development team
to consider environmental impacts at the concept stage even though little or no specific data
(regarding material and energy use, emissions, and waste generation) are yet available for
the actual product and a detailed environmental impact assessment is not yet possible. In the
case of product redesign, however, relevant data may be provided by impact analysis of
some existing products. (See life cycle assessment methods in step 5 below.)

Exhibit 12-6 shows a chart that can be used to qualitatively assess the environmental
impacts over the product life cycle. The chart is an adaption of the LiDS Wheel (Brezet
and van Hemel, 1997) and the EcoDesign Web (Bhamra and Lofthouse, 2007). To create
this chart, the team asks, “What are the significant sources of potential environmental im-
pact in each life cycle stage?” Specific questions for each stage are given in Exhibit 12-7
and may be helpful in conducting this qualitative analysis.

The team lists for each life cycle stage the anticipated key environmental impacts. The
height of each bar in the chart represents the team’s judgment about the overall magnitude
of the potential environmental impacts and therefore where to focus their DFE efforts.
For some products (e.g. automobiles, electronic devices) the most significant impacts are
found to be in the use stage. For other products (e.g. clothing, office furniture) the great-
est impacts may be in the materials, production, and recovery stages. Exhibit 12-6 shows
a qualitative life cycle assessment for office furniture in general. This understanding
guided DFE in the Setu chair project.

 

Waste generation

during recovery
Reduced process

Landfill leads to

Air pollution land degradation

due to mining emissions Landfill generates

 

 

 

Life
Cycle

toxic ash
Materials Production Distribution Use Recovery

EXHIBIT 1 2-6 The qualitative life cycle assessment represents the team’s estimate of the potential types
and magnitudes of environmental impacts of the product over its life cycle. This chart depicts the types of
impacts most relevant to office furniture products such as the Setu chair.240 Chapter 12

 

Life Cycle Stage Questions

 

Materials -ow much, and what types of recyclable materials will be used?
-ow much, and what types of non recyclable materials will be used?
-ow much, and what types of additives will be used?

What is the environmental profile of the materials?

-ow much energy will be required to extract these materials?

Which means of transport will be used to procure them?

 

Production -ow many, and what types of production processes will be used?
-ow much, and what types of auxiliary materials are needed?
-ow high will the energy consumption be?

-ow much waste will be generated?

Can production waste be separated for recycling?

 

 

 

Distribution ' What kind of transport packaging, bulk packaging, and retail packaging will be used
(volumes, weights, materials, reusability)?
. Which means of transport will be used?

 

Use How much, and what type of energy will be required?

How much, and what kind of consumables will be needed?

What will be the technical lifetime?

How much maintenance and repairs will be needed?

What and how much auxiliary materials and energy will be required?

What will be the aesthetic lifetime of the product?

 

Recovery How can the product be reused?

Will the components or materials be reused?

Can the product be quickly disassembled using common tools?
What materials will be recyclable?

Will recyclable materials be identifiable?

How will the product be disposed?

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 2-7 Typical questions for consideration of the environmental impacts of each life cycle stage.
Adapted from Brezet and van Hemel (1997).

Step 3: Select DFE Guidelines

Guidelines help product design teams to make early DFE decisions without the type of
detailed environmental impact analysis that is only possible after the design is more fully
specified. Relevant guidelines may be selected based in part on the qualitative assessment
of life cycle impacts (from step 2). Selecting relevant guidelines during the concept devel-
opment phase allows the product development team to apply them throughout the product
development project.

Exhibit 12-8 shows a compilation of DFE guidelines based on a study by Telenko et al.
(2008). Each life cycle stage has its own DFE guidelines that provide product development
teams with instructions on how to reduce the environmental impacts of a product. A more
detailed list of DFE guidelines is provided in the appendix to this chapter. Many of the guide-
lines relate to selection of materials. This underscores the central role of materials in DFE.Design for Environment 241

 

Life Cycle Stage

Design for Environment Guidelines

 

Materials

Sustainability of resources '

Specify renewable and abundant resources.*
Specify recyclable and/or recycled materials.*
Specify renewable forms of energy.*

 

Healthy inputs and outputs '

Specify nonhazardous materials.*

Install protection against release of pollutants
and hazardous substances.

Include labels and instructions for safe
handling of toxic materials.*

 

Production

Minimal use of resources '
in production

Employ as few manufacturing steps as
possible.*

Specify materials that do not require surface
treatments or coatings.*

Minimize the number of components.*
Specify lightweight materials and
components.*

 

Distribution

Minimal use of resources '
in distribution '

Minimize packaging.

Use recyclable and/or reusable packaging
materials.

Employ folding, nesting, or disassembly to
distribute products in a compact state.
Apply structural techniques and materials to
minimize the total volume of material.

 

Use

Efficiency of resources '
during use

Implement default power—down for
subsystems that are not in use.

Use feedback mechanisms to indicate how
much energy or water are being consumed.
Implement intuitive controls for resource—
saving features.

 

Appropriate durability '

Consider aesthetics and functionality to
ensure the aesthetic life is equal to the
technical life.

Facilitate repair and upgrading.

Ensure minimal maintenance.

Minimize failure modes.

 

Recovery

 

Disassembly, separation, '
and purification

 

Ensure that joints and fasteners are easily
accessible.*

Specify joints and fasteners so that they are
separable by hand or with common tools.*
Ensure that incompatible materials are easily
separated.*

 

EXHIBIT 1 2-8 Design for environment guidelines arranged according to the life cycle stage of a product.
Based on Telenko et al. (2008). Guidelines used in the Setu project are identified with an asterisk.242 Chapter 12

For the Setu project, the DFE experts provided the product development team with
several guidelines. These guidelines are identified with an asterisk in Exhibit 12-8.

Step 4: Apply the DFE Guidelines to the Initial Product Design

EXHIBIT

1 2-9 The
Setu spine
was inspired

by the human
backbone.

As the product architecture is developed during the system-level design phase (see Chap-
ter 10, Product Architecture), some initial material choices are made along with some of
the module design decisions. It is beneficial, therefore, to apply the relevant DFE guide-
lines (selected in step 3) at this point. In this way, the initial product design may have
lower environmental impacts.

The Setu team wanted the chair to be lightweight in order to reduce materials use and
transportation impacts (application of the DFE guideline: Specify lightweight materials
and components). They achieved this by developing a concept and product architecture that
avoided an under-seat tilt mechanism and other complexities. This helped to reduce the chairs
weight by as much as 20 pounds (9 kg). The Setu team also looked for new ways to ease the
disassembly of the Setu in order to facilitate recycling. They placed each joint where it is eas-
ily accessible and also ensured that Setu’s components are separable by hand or with common
tools (application of the DFE guidelines: Ensure that joints and fasteners are easily accessible;
Specify joints and fasteners so that they are separable by hand or with common tools).

In the detail-design phase, the exact materials specifications, detailed geometry, and
manufacturing processes are determined. Application of the DFE guidelines in detail design
is essentially the same as in system-level design; however, at this point many more decisions
are being made and environmental factors can be considered with greater precision. By
specifying low-impact materials and reducing energy consumption, product development
teams create more environmentally friendly products. Furthermore, the DFE guidelines may
inspire product development teams to come up with improvement in the functionality and
durability of the product, which may lead to significant lower environmental impacts.

The Setu spine geometry, shown in Exhibit 12-9, was inspired by the human backbone.
Studio 7.5 designers prototyped many iterations of the spine in order to achieve proper
support and recline (see Exhibit 12-10). Once the shape of the spine was set, the team had
to find materials that suited both the functional and environmental requirements.

 

 

 

 

Courtesy of Studio 7.5 and Herman Miller, Inc.EXHIBIT

1 2-1 0 The
design team
prototyped
many
variations of
Setu’s spine
and related
components.

Design for Environment 243

 

Courtesy of Studio 7.5 and Herman Miller, Inc.

To specify materials that fit the environmental and functional requirements, the develop-
ment team used Herman Miller’s proprietary materials database. The database, maintained
together with MBDC, considers the safety and environmental impacts of each material
and classifies them into one of four categories: green (little to no hazard), yellow (low to
moderate hazard), orange (incomplete data), and red (high hazard). Herman Miller’s aim
was to use only materials that rank yellow or green for all new products.

For example, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is classified as a red material. PVC is a poly-
mer that is commonly used in fumiture and other products due to its low cost and high
strength. However, both the production and the incineration of PVC releases toxic emis-
sions. To avoid using materials that are toxic to humans and the environment (application
of the DFE guideline: Specify nonhazardous materials), the engineers specified safer ma-
terials such as polypropylene and avoided PVC entirely.

Step 5: Assess the Environmental Impacts

The next step is to assess, to the extent possible, the environmental impacts of the product
over its entire life cycle. To do so with precision requires a detailed understanding of how
the product is to be produced, distributed, used over its lifetime, and recycled or disposed244 Chapter 12

at the end of its useful life. This assessment is generally done on the basis of the detailed
bill of materials (BOM), including sources of energy, component material specifications,
suppliers, transportation modes, waste streams, recycling methods, and disposal means.
Several quantitative life cycle assessment (LCA) tools are available to conduct such an
environmental assessment. These tools range in price and complexity and would be se-
lected based on the types of materials and processes involved, and the precision required
of the analysis.

LCA requires a significant amount of time, training, and data. Many LCA analyses are
comparative and provide a basis for considering the environmental performance of prod-
uct design alternatives. Commercial LCA software is becoming widely used in product
design, and supporting data are available for common materials, production processes,
transport methods, energy generation processes, and disposal scenarios.

Herman Miller uses their own proprietary DFE assessment tool, developed for them by
MBDC. The DFE tool consists of a spreadsheet interface and the materials database using
the color coding described above. The tool considers four factors for each component in
the product:

1. Material chemistry: Fraction of the materials by weight that are the safest possible in
terms of human toxicity and environmental concerns.

2. Recycled content: Fraction of the materials by weight that are postindustrial or post-
consumer recycled content.

3. Disassembly: Fraction of the materials by weight that can be readily disassembled.
4. Recyclability: Fraction of the materials by weight that are recyclable.

Once the initial Setu design was established, the chair was divided into modules, with
different teams assigned to develop each module. As each team designed their module,
the DFE team assessed the design using the DFE tool.

Compare the Environmental Impacts to DFE Goals

This step compares the environmental impacts of the evolving design to the DFE goals
established in the planning phase. If several design options were created in the detail-
design phase, they may now be compared to judge which one has the lowest environmen-
tal impacts. Unless the product development team is very experienced in DFE, the design
will generally have much room for improvement. Usually several DFE iterations are re-
quired before the team is satisfied that the product is as good as it should be from a DFE
perspective.

Step 6: Refine the Product Design to Reduce or Eliminate the
Environmental Impacts

The objective of this step and subsequent DFE iterations is to reduce or eliminate any
significant environmental impacts through redesign. The process repeats until the environ-
mental impacts have been reduced to an acceptable level and the environmental perfor-
mance fits the DFE goals. Redesign for ongoing improvement of DFE may also continue
after production begins. For the Aeron and Mirra chairs (shown in Exhibit 12-1), HermanEXHIBIT

1 2-1 1 The
final design
of the Setu
spine (left)
and aluminum
base (right).

Design for Environment 245

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Courtesy of Herman Miller, Inc.

Miller made several modifications to materials specifications and sources since the initial
release of these products, reducing their environmental impacts.

After several design iterations, the Setu team developed a way to co-mold the
spine using two different polypropylene materials that are compatible for recycling
without separation. The inner and outer rails of the spine are made of a polypropylene-
and-glass composite, while the connecting spokes are molded using a more ﬂexible
polypropylene-and-rubber composite (see Exhibit 12-11). Setu’s aluminum base is an
example of “minimal design.” Uncoated and unpolished, with no finishing labor and
no harmful toxins, it is durable and has less environmental impacts than traditionally
finished chair bases.

One of the difficult trade-offs addressed in the development of Setu was related to se-
lection of materials for the arms of the chair. While they were determined to avoid using
PVC, the team was not able to mold the arms using all olefinic materials (such as poly-
propylene) due to concerns of durability and fatigue failure. The Setu arms, therefore,
were molded from nylon and over-molded with a thermoplastic elastomer. Because these
materials are not chemically compatible for recycling, this decision limited the chair’s
overall recyclability.

Step 7: Reflect on the DFE Process and Results

As with every aspect of the product development process, the final activity is to ask:

- How well did we execute the DFE process?
- How can our DFE process be improved?
- What DFE improvements can be made on derivative and future products?246 Chapter 12

 

 

 

DFE Assessment Factor Setu Score Factor Weight Weighted Score
Material Chemistry 50% 33.3% 16.7%
Recycled Content 44% 8.4% 3.7%
Disassembly 86% 33.3% 28.6%
Recyclability 92% 25.0% 23.0%
Overall Score 100% 72%

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 2-1 2 Herman Miller’s DFE assessment tool considers four factors and
computes the weighted overall score of 72 percent for the Setu chair.

Based on Herman Miller’s DFE assessment tool, on a scale of 0 to 100 percent, with
100 percent being a truly “cradle-to-cradle” product, the Setu chair achieved a rating of
72 percent, as shown in Exhibit 12-12.

The Setu team was pleased with the chair in terms of ease of disassembly and feasibil-
ity of recycling. Over the course of developing the Setu, the chair’s recyclability score
moved up and down and eventually dropped from 99 percent to 92 percent due to the
material selection trade-off in design of the arms. One very important achievement made
during the development of the Setu to enable its recyclability was a change in the spine’s
materials. Early iterations used dissimilar materials bonded together, which could not be
recycled. The DFE team challenged the Setu team to innovate further. The resulting solu-
tion is constructed of two materials that are compatible for recycling without separation.
Unfortunately, such a solution could not be developed for the Setu arms, and incompat-
ible bonded materials were used there.

While highly successful in terms of implementing DFE, the Setu chair still had some
negative environmental impacts, particularly in terms of material chemistry and use of re-
cycled content, as shown in Exhibit 12-12. This reﬂects the reality that creating a perfect
product from a DFE perspective is a goal that may take years to achieve. Effective DFE
requires a product development team that strives for continuous improvement. The DFE
team may be able to further develop the Setu chair to reduce some of the known impacts.
For example, molding the Setu arms entirely using polypropylene would likely improve
recyclability and reduce cost, but would also require addressing several very challenging
technical issues.

To further improve their DFE process, Herman Miller began to use LCA software
to monitor their DFE results and to guide further refinement of their products. They
next planned to integrate “carbon footprint” into their DFE tool. The carbon footprint
of a product is the amount of greenhouse gas emissions caused by the product, usually
expressed in terms of the equivalent mass of C02 emitted. The consideration of carbon
footprint would further affect Herman Miller’s material choices. For example, based only
on recyclability and environmental toxicity, aluminum is an environmentally friendly ma-
terial. However, considering the carbon footprint of aluminum, it may be a less favorable
choice (compared to steel, for example) due to the amount of energy required to produce
new aluminum. Recycled aluminum, however, uses much less energy, so this analysis also
depends upon the sources of the materials and energy used to process the metals.Design for Environment 247

 

Summary

Every product has environmental impacts over its life cycle. Design for environment
(DFE) provides companies with a practical method to minimize or eliminate these envi-
ronmental impacts.

0 Effective DFE maintains or improves product quality and cost while reducing environ-

mental impacts.

DFE expands the traditional manufacturer’s focus to consider the full product life
cycle and its relationship to the environment. It begins with the extraction and process-
ing of raw materials from natural resources, followed by production, distribution, and
use of the product. Finally, at the end of the product’s useful life are several recovery
options: remanufacturing or reuse of components, recycling of materials, or disposal
through incineration or deposition in a landfill, to reintegrate the product into a closed-
loop cycle.

DFE may involve activities throughout the product development process and requires
an interdisciplinary approach. Industrial design, engineering, purchasing, and market-
ing all work together in the development of environmentally friendly products.

The DFE process consists of seven steps. Product development teams will likely repeat
some steps several times.

. Set the DFE agenda: drivers, goals, and team.

. Identify potential environmental impacts.

Select DFE guidelines.

. Apply the DFE guidelines to the initial product design.

. Assess the environmental impacts.

Refine the product design to reduce or eliminate the environmental impacts.

sgwewwe‘

Reﬂect on the DFE process and results.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

There are several texts covering the topic of DFE. Bhamra and Lofthouse provide an
introduction to design for sustainability and a description of several strategic tools that
can be used for DFE such as the EcoDesign Web. Fiksel’s book is a comprehensive
guide to DFE as a life cycle approach to new product and process development. Lewis
et al. provide an overview and description of the environmental impacts and several
environmental assessment tools.

Bhamra, T., and V. Lofthouse, Design for Sustainability: A Practical Approach,

Gower, UK, 2007.

Fiksel, J. R., Design for Environment: A Guide to Sustainable Product Development,
second edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2009.

Lewis, H., J. Gertsakis, and T. Grant, Design and Environment: A Global Guide to
Designing Greener Goods, Greenleaf Publishing Limited, Sheffield, UK, 2001.248 Chapter 12

Exercises

A number of authors have argued persuasively for due consideration of environmental
impacts in design. Burall concluded that there is no longer a conﬂict between a
green approach to design and business success. McDonough and Braungart explain
that the conﬂict between industry and the environment is not an indictment of
commerce but rather an outgrowth of purely opportunistic design. Papanek challenged
designers to face their social and environmental responsibilities instead of only
commercial interests. The Brundtland Report (1987) first defined the term sustainable
development.

Burall, R, Green Design, Design Council, London, 1991.

McDonough, W., and M. Braungart, Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We Make
Things, North Point Press, New York, 2002.

Papanek, V., Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change, Van
Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, 1971.

World Commission on Environment and Development, The Brundtland Report: Our
Common Future, Oxford University Press, London, 1987.

Portions of the DFE method presented in this chapter are derived from various sources.
The internal and external drivers for DFE are based on Brezet and van Hemel’s Ecodesign
work. The DFE goals are adapted from the environmental strategies listed by Giudice et al.
The DFE guidelines are derived from the comprehensive compilation by Telenko et al.
The materials-based emphasis of DFE reﬂects the cradle-to-cradle concept explained by
McDonough and Braungart.

Brezet, H., and C. van Hemel, Ecodesign: A Promising Approach to Sustainable

Production and Consumption, TU Delft, Netherlands, 1997.

Giudice, F., G. La Rosa, and A. Risitano, Product Design for the Environment: A Life
Cycle Approach, CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL, 2006.

Telenko, C., C. C. Seepersad, and M. E. Webber, A Compilation of Design for
Environment Princzples and Guidelines, ASME DETC Design for Manufacturing
and the Life Cycle Conference, New York, 2008.

The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has developed internationally
agreed standards for LCA, known as ISO 14040.
International Organization for Standardization, Environmental Management:
Life Cycle Assessment—Princzples and Framework, European Committee for
Standardization, Brussels, 2006.

1. List at least 10 types of environmental impacts over the life cycle of your personal
computer or mobile phone. Chart these as in Exhibit 12-6, representing your judgment
of the relative impact of each life cycle stage.

2. Disassemble a simple product, such as a ballpoint pen. Suggest two ways to reduce its
environmental impacts.

3. For the product considered in Exercise 1, compute its environmental impact score
using any LCA analysis tool available to you.Design for Environment 249

Thought Questions

1.

What are some of the ways in which you have become more aware of your own envi-
ronmental impact in recent years?

. For the Setu chair, what types of environmental impacts would be in the use stage of

its life cycle?

. In what ways can DFE help to improve the quality of a product, in terms of its func-

tionality, reliability, durability, and reparability?

. For each life cycle stage, identify a product or service that has high environmental im-

pacts during the particular life cycle stage. Then, suggest a new or existing product or
service that provides the same functionality with lower (or without any) environmental
impacts.

. How would you explicitly include renewable and nonrenewable energy in the life cycle

diagram in Exhibit 12-3? Draw such a diagram and explain it.

. Explain the relationship between DFE and DFM. Consider, for example, those DFE

guidelines related to production in Exhibit 12-8.

. Consider the DFE assessment tool used by Herman Miller (Exhibit 12-12), which

computed the weighted sum of scores for material chemistry, use of recycled content,
ease of disassembly, and recyclability. What modifications would you propose to cre-

ate a DFE assessment tool for a different type of product, such as an automobile or a
mobile phone?250 Chapter 12

Appendix

 

Design for Environment Guidelines

Telenko et al. (2008) compiled an extensive list of DFE guidelines based on a number
of sources covering a range of industries. Each life cycle stage has its own DFE guide-
lines that provide product development teams with suggestions to reduce environmental
impacts. The list below is based upon the compilation by Telenko et al.

Life Cycle Stage: Materials

Ensure Sustainability of Resources

1.
2.

99°89???”

Specify renewable and abundant resources.

Specify recyclable or recycled materials, especially those within the company or for
which a market exists or needs to be stimulated.

Layer recycled and virgin material where virgin material is necessary.
Exploit unique properties of recycled materials.

Employ common and remanufactured components across models.
Specify mutually compatible materials and fasteners for recycling.
Specify one type of material for the product and its subassemblies.
Specify noncomposite, nonblended materials and no alloys.

Specify renewable forms of energy.

Ensure Healthy Inputs and Outputs

10.
11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

Install protection against release of pollutants and hazardous substances.

Specify nonhazardous and otherwise environmentally “clean” substances, especially
in regards to user health.

Ensure that wastes are water-based or biodegradable.

Specify the cleanest source of energy.

Include labels and instructions for safe handling of toxic materials.

Specify clean production processes for the product and in selection of components.
Concentrate toxic elements for easy removal and treatment.

Life Cycle Stage: Production

Ensure Minimal Use of Resources in Production

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

Apply structural techniques and materials to minimize the total volume of material.
Specify materials that do not require additional surface treatment, coatings, or inks.
Structure the product to avoid rejects and minimize material waste in production.
Minimize the number of components.

Specify materials with low-intensity production and agriculture.

Specify clean, high-efficiency production processes.

Employ as few manufacturing steps as possible.Design for Environment 251

Life Cycle Phase: Distribution

Ensure Minimal Use of Resources in Distribution

24. Replace the functions and appeals of packaging through the product’s design.

25. Employ folding, nesting, or disassembly to distribute products in a compact state.
26. Specify lightweight materials and components.

Life Cycle Stage: Use

Ensure Efficiency of Resources During Product Use

27. Implement reusable supplies for ensuring the maximum usefulness of consumables.
28. Implement fail-safes against heat and material loss.

29. Minimize the volume and weight of parts and materials to which energy is trans-
ferred.

30. Specify best-in-class, energy-efficient components.

31. Implement default power-down for subsystems that are not in use.
32. Ensure rapid warm-up and power-down.

33. Maximize system efficiency for an entire range of usage conditions.

34. Interconnect available ﬂows of energy and materials within the product and between
the product and its environment.

35. Incorporate partial operation and permit users to turn off systems partially or
completely.

36. Use feedback mechanisms to indicate how much energy or water is being consumed.
37. Incorporate intuitive controls for resource-saving features.

38. Incorporate features that prevent waste of materials by the user.

39. Use default mechanisms to automatically reset the product to its most efficient setting.

EnsureAppropriate Durability of the Product and Components
40. Reutilize high-embedded energy components.
41. Plan for ongoing efficiency improvements.

42. Improve aesthetics and functionality to ensure the aesthetic life is equal to the
technical life.

43. Ensure minimal maintenance and minimize failure modes in the product and its
components.

44. Specify better materials, surface treatments, or structural arrangements to protect
products from dirt, corrosion, and wear.

45. Indicate on the product which parts are to be cleaned/maintained in a specific way.
46. Make wear detectable.

47. Allow easy repair and upgrading, especially for components that experience rapid
change.

48. Require few service and inspection tools.
49. Facilitate testing of components.
50. Allow for repetitive disassembly and reassembly.252 Chapter 12

Life Cycle Stage: Recovery

Enable Disassembly, Separation, and Purification of Materials and Components

51.
52.
53.
54.
55.

56.
57.
58.
59.

60.
61.
62.

63.
64.
65.
66.
67.

Indicate on the product how it should be opened and make access points obvious.
Ensure that joints and fasteners are easily accessible.

Maintain stability and part placement during disassembly.

Minimize the number and variety of joining elements.

Ensure that destructive disassembly techniques do not harm people or reusable com-
ponents.

Ensure that reusable parts can be cleaned easily and without damage.
Ensure that incompatible materials are easily separated.
Make component interfaces simple and reversibly separable.

Organize a product or system into hierarchical modules by aesthetic, repair, and end-
of—life protocol.

Implement reusable/ swappable platforms, modules, and components.
Condense into a minimal number of parts.

Specify compatible adhesives, labels, surface coatings, pigments, and the like that do
not interfere with cleaning.

Employ one disassembly direction without reorientation.

Specify all joints so that they are separable by hand or only a few, simple tools.
Minimize the number and length of operations for detachment.

Mark materials in molds with types and reutilization protocols.

Use a shallow or open structure for easy access to subassemblies.CHAPTER THIRTEEN

Design for
Manufacturing

 

Courtesy of General Motors Corp.

EXHIBIT 1 3-1
The General Motors 3.8-liter V6 engine.
253254 Chapter 13

EXHIBIT 1 3-2

The original
and redesigned
air intake
manifolds.

The body of
the original
manifold (top)
is made of cast
aluminum. The
redesigned
manifold
(bottom) is
made of molded
thermoplastic
composite.

General Motors Powertrain Division manufactures about 3,500 3.8-liter V6 engines every
day (Exhibit 13-1). Facing such high production volumes, the company had a strong inter-
est in reducing the cost of the engine while simultaneously enhancing its quality. A team
was formed to improve one of the most expensive subassemblies in the engine: the air
intake manifold. (The intake manifold’s primary function is to route air from the throttle
to the intake valves at the cylinders.) The original and redesigned intake manifold assem-
blies are shown in Exhibit 13-2. This chapter presents a method of design for manufactur-
ing using the GM V6 intake manifold as an example.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Photos by Stuart CohenDesign for Manufacturing 255

Design for Manufacturing Defined

Customer needs and product specifications are useful for guiding the concept phase of
product development; however, during the later development activities teams often have
difficulty linking needs and specifications to the specific design issues they face. For this
reason, many teams practice “design for X” (DFX) methodologies, where X may cor-
respond to one of dozens of quality criteria such as reliability, robustness, serviceability,
environmental impact, or manufacturability. The most common of these methodologies is
design for manufacturing (DFM), which is of universal importance because it directly ad-
dresses manufacturing costs.

This chapter is primarily about DFM, but it is also intended to illustrate, by example,
these general principles, which apply to methodologies for achieving any of the Xs in DFX:

° Detail-design decisions can have substantial impact on product quality and cost.

0 Development teams face multiple, and often conﬂicting, goals.

0 It is important to have metrics with which to compare alternative designs.

0 Dramatic improvements often require substantial creative efforts early in the process.
0 A well-defined method assists the decision-making process.

Manufacturing cost is a key determinant of the economic success of a product. In
simple terms, economic success depends on the profit margin earned on each sale of the
product and on how many units of the product the firm can sell. Profit margin is the dif-
ference between the manufacturer’s selling price and the cost of making the product. The
number of units sold and the sales price are to a large degree determined by the overall
quality of the product. Economically successful design is therefore about ensuring high
product quality while minimizing manufacturing cost. DFM is one method for achieving
this goal; effective DFM practice leads to low manufacturing costs without sacrificing
product quality. (See Chapter 17, Product Development Economics, for a more detailed
discussion of models relating manufacturing costs to economic success.)

DFM Requires a Cross-Functional Team

Design for manufacturing is one of the most integrative practices involved in product de-
velopment. DFM utilizes information of several types, including (1) sketches, drawings,
product specifications, and design alternatives; (2) a detailed understanding of production
and assembly processes; and (3) estimates of manufacturing costs, production volumes,
and ramp-up timing. DFM therefore requires the contributions of most members of the
development team as well as outside experts. DFM efforts commonly draw upon exper-
tise from manufacturing engineers, cost accountants, and production personnel, in ad-
dition to product designers. Many companies use structured, team-based workshops to
facilitate the integration and sharing of views required for DFM.

DFM ls Performed throughout the Development Process

DFM begins during the concept development phase, when the product’s functions and
specifications are being determined. When choosing a product concept, cost is almost
always one of the criteria on which the decision is made—even though cost estimates at
this phase are highly subjective and approximate. When product specifications are256 Chapter 13

finalized, the team makes trade-offs between desired performance characteristics. For
example, weight reduction may increase manufacturing costs. At this point, the team may
have an approximate bill of materials (a list of parts) with estimates of costs. During the
system-level design phase of development, the team makes decisions about how to break
up the product into individual components, based in large measure on the expected cost
and manufacturing complexity implications. Accurate cost estimates finally become
available during the detail-design phase of development, when many more decisions are
driven by manufacturing concerns.

Overview of the DFM Process
Our DFM method is illustrated in Exhibit 13-3. It consists of five steps plus iteration:

Estimate the manufacturing costs.

Reduce the costs of components.

Reduce the costs of assembly.

Reduce the costs of supporting production.

9:59P)?

Consider the impact of DFM decisions on other factors.

As shown in Exhibit 13-3, the DFM method begins with the estimation of the manu-
facturing cost of the proposed design. This helps the team to determine at a general level
which aspects of the design—components, assembly, or support—are most costly. The
team then directs its attention to the appropriate areas in the subsequent steps. This pro-
cess is iterative. It is not unusual to recompute the manufacturing cost estimate and to
improve the design of the product dozens of times before agreeing that it is good enough.
As long as the product design is improving, these DFM iterations may continue even
until pilot production begins. At some point, the design is frozen (or “released”), and any
further modifications are considered formal “engineering changes” or become part of the
next generation of the product.

In the next section, we use the original GM V6 intake manifold as an example and
explain how manufacturing costs are determined. Then, recognizing that accurate cost
estimates are difficult (if not impossible) to obtain, we present several useful methods for
reducing the costs of components, assembly, and production support. We use the rede-
signed intake manifold and other products as examples to illustrate these DFM principles.
Finally, we discuss the results achieved through DFM and some of the broader implica-
tions of DFM decisions.

Step 1: Estimate the Manufacturing Costs

Exhibit 13-4 shows a simple input-output model of a manufacturing system. The inputs
include raw materials, purchased components, employees’ efforts, energy, and equipment.
The outputs include finished goods and waste. Manufacturing cost is the sum of all of the
expenditures for the inputs of the system and for disposal of the wastes produced by the
system. As the metric of cost for a product, firms generally use unit manufacturing cost,
which is computed by dividing the total manufacturing costs for some period (usually a
quarter or a year) by the number of units of the product manufactured during that period.
This simple concept is complicated in practice by several issues:EXHIBIT 1 3-3
The design for

manufacturing
(DFM) method.

Design for Manufacturing 257

Proposed
Design

i

Estimate the
Manufacturing
Costs

 

 

 

 

 

>

  
    

 

  
    

Reduce the Costs
of Supporting
Production

  
  

  
  

Reduce the Costs
of Assembly

Reduce the Costs
of Components

 

 

Consider the Impact
of DFM Decisions on
Other Factors

 

l

Recompute the
Manufacturing
Costs

 

 

 

 

N Good
Enough

 

 

Y

Acceptable
Design

0 What are the boundaries of the manufacturing system? Should the field service opera-
tions be included? What about product development activities?

° How do we “charge” the product for the use of expensive general-purpose equipment
that lasts for many years?

° How are costs allocated among more than one product line in large, multiproduct
manufacturing systems?

These are issues around which much of the field of managerial accounting is built, and
we do not treat them in depth here. Nevertheless, we will be mindful of these complica-
tions as we discuss cost and DFM in this chapter.258 Chapter 13

EXHIBIT 1 3-4
A simple
input-output
model of a
manufacturing
system.

Equipment Information Tooling

ill

Labor —> MANUFACTURING SYSTEM —> Finished Goods

Raw Materials —>

Purchased
Components

 

 

Energy Supplies Services Waste

Exhibit 13-5 shows one way of categorizing the elements of manufacturing cost.
Under this scheme, the unit manufacturing cost of a product consists of costs in three
categories:

1. Component costs: The components of a product (also simply called parts of the
product) may include standard parts purchased from suppliers. Examples of standard
components include motors, switches, electronic chips, and screws. Other components
are custom parts, made according to the manufacturer’s design from raw materials, such
as sheet steel, plastic pellets, or aluminum bars. Some custom components are made in
the manufacturer’s own plant, while others may be produced by suppliers according to the
manufacturer’s design specifications.

2. Assembly costs: Discrete goods are generally assembled from parts. The process of as-
sembling almost always incurs labor costs and may also incur costs for equipment and tooling.

 

Manufacturing Cost

 

 

 

 

 

Components

    

     

Assembly Overhead

 

 

 

 

/\

Standard |

 

Equipment Indirect
Custom Labor andTooIing Support Allocation

 

Raw
Material

Processing | Tooling

EXHIBIT 1 3-5 Elements of the manufacturing cost of a product.Design for Manufacturing 259

3. Overhead costs: Overhead is the category used to encompass all of the other costs.
We find it useful to distinguish between two types of overhead: support costs and other
indirect allocations. Support costs are the costs associated with materials handling, qual-
ity assurance, purchasing, shipping, receiving, facilities, and equipment/tooling mainte-
nance (among others). These are the support systems required to manufacture the prod-
uct, and these costs do greatly depend upon the product design. Nevertheless, because
these costs are often shared by more than one product line, they are lumped together in
the category of overhead. Indirect allocations are the costs of manufacturing that can-
not be directly linked to a particular product but that must be paid for to be in business.
For example, the salary of the security guard and the cost of maintenance to the building
and grounds are indirect costs because these activities are shared among several different
products and are difficult to allocate directly to a specific product. Because indirect costs
are not specifically linked to the design of the product, they are not relevant to DFM,
even though they do contribute to the cost of the product.

Transportation Costs

The model of manufacturing cost in Exhibit 13-5 does not include any costs for transport-
ing finished goods through the distribution system. Manufacturing often occurs at a location
a great distance from the eventual customer. Although the DFM method presented here
does not explicitly include transportation expense, estimating those costs is relatively easy.
For instance, most goods are transported overseas using standard shipping containers, which
hold about 70 cubic meters of cargo. In most cases, these containers are shipped from one
location to another at a fixed cost. Currently the cost of shipping a container between Asia
and the United States is roughly 6,000 USD, resulting in a shipping cost rate of 86 USD/m3.
Rates for air freight and trucking, although based on a combination of weight and volume,
are also readily available. Based on these rates, the product design team can easily include
transportation costs in its analysis, and doing so may be warranted when the team faces
design decisions involving the physical volume or weight of the product.

Fixed Costs versus Variable Costs

Another way to divide manufacturing costs is between ﬁxed costs and variable costs.
Fixed costs are those that are incurred in a predetermined amount, regardless of how
many units of the product are manufactured. Purchasing the injection mold required for
the new intake manifold is an example of a fixed cost. Whether 1,000 or 1 million units
are produced, the fixed cost of the mold is incurred and does not change. Another exam-
ple is the cost of setting up the factory work area for the intake manifold assembly line.
This cost is also fixed, regardless of how many units are produced. Despite the terminol-
ogy, however, no cost is truly fixed. If we quadruple the production quantity, we may have
to build another production line. Conversely, we may be able to consolidate two assembly
cells if we cannot use all the capacity due to dramatically lower production quantities.
When considering a cost as fixed, ranges of production quantities and the assumed time
horizon should be specified.

Variable costs are those incurred in direct proportion to the number of units pro-
duced. For example, the cost of raw materials is directly proportional to how many intake260 Chapter 13

manifolds are produced, and therefore to how many 3.8-liter V6 engines are made. As-
sembly labor is sometimes considered a variable cost as well because many firms can ad-
just the staffing of assembly operations by shifting workers to other areas on short notice.

The Bill of Materials

Because manufacturing cost estimation is fundamental to DFM, it is useful to keep this
information well organized. Exhibit 13-6 shows an information system for recording
manufacturing cost estimates. It basically consists of a bill of materials (BOM)
augmented with cost information. The BOM (usually pronounced bomb) is a list of each
individual component in the product. Frequently the BOM is created using an indented
format in which the assembly “tree structure” is illustrated by the indentation of compo-
nents and subassembly names.

The columns of the BOM show the cost estimates broken down into fixed and variable
costs. The variable costs may include materials, machine time, and labor. Fixed costs con-
sist of tooling and other nonrecurring expenses (NRE) such as specialized equipment and
one-time setup costs. The tooling lifetime is used to compute the unit fixed cost (unless
the tool’s expected lifetime exceeds the product’s lifetime volume, in which case the lower
product volume is used). To compute total cost, overhead is added according to the firm’s
accepted cost accounting scheme. Note that additional fixed costs, such as depreciation
of capital equipment used for several products, are often also included in the overhead
charge.

 

Processing Total Unit Tooling Tooling Total Unit

Purchased (Machine Assembly Variable and Other Lifetime, Fixed Total

 

 

Component Materials + Labor) (Labor) Cost NRE, K$ K units Cost Cost
Manifold
machined
casting 12.83 5.23 18.06 1960 500+ 0.50 18.56
EGR return
pipe 1.30 0.15 1.45 1.45
PCV assembly
Valve 1.35 0.14 1.49 1.49
Gasket 0.05 0.13 0.18 0.18
Cover 0.76 0.13 0.89 0.89
Screws (3) 0.06 0.15 0.21 0.21
Vacuum source block assembly
Block 0.95 0.13 1.08 1.08
Gasket 0.03 0.05 0.08 0.08
Screw 0.02 0.09 0.11 0.11
Total Direct
Costs 17.35 5.23 0.95 23.53 1960 0.50 24.03
Overhead
Charges 2.60 9.42 1.71 0.75 14.48
Total Cost 38.51

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 3-6

Indented bill of materials showing cost estimates for the original intake manifold and related

components. The EGR (exhaust gas recirculation), PCV (positive crankcase ventilation), and vacuum block components
are included here to facilitate comparison with the redesigned manifold assembly.Design for Manufacturing 261

Estimating the Costs of Standard Components

The costs of standard components are estimated by either (1) comparing each part to a sub-
stantially similar part the firm is already producing or purchasing in comparable volumes or
(2) soliciting price quotes from vendors or suppliers. The costs of minor components (e.g.,
bolts, springs, and inserts) are usually obtained from the firm’s experience with similar com-
ponents, while the costs of maj or components are usually obtained from vendor quotes.

In obtaining price quotes, the estimated production quantities are extremely important.
For example, the unit price on a purchase of a dozen screws or inserts may be 10 times
higher than the unit prices paid by GM when purchasing 100,000 of these parts every
month. If the anticipated production quantities are high enough, an application engineer
or sales engineer is usually quite willing to work with the development team to specify a
component properly. For internally fabricated standard components, if the required quan-
tities are high, there may not be available production capacity, necessitating the purchase
of additional equipment or the use of outside suppliers.

Some suppliers will design and fabricate a custom variation to a standard component if
production quantities are high enough. For example, small electric motors, such as those
found in powered hand tools, are often designed and built specifically for the product ap-
plication. If the production quantities are high enough (say, 100,000 per year in this case),
these custom motors are quite economical ($1 to $5 per unit, depending on the performance
characteristics). For the intake manifold, the volumes are sufficiently high that custom studs,
bushings, and other parts may not cost much more than standard components. However, as
we discuss later, introducing new parts can add substantial cost and complexity to the pro-
duction system and field service operations, which increases the support costs.

Vendors for most standard components can be found in the Thomas Register of
American Manufacturers or by looking for company names on components used in related
products. To obtain a price quote, first request a catalog or product literature (now gener-
ally available on the Internet). Then, either choose a part number or, if a custom component
will be used, write a one-page description of the requirements of the component. Next,
telephone the vendor, ask to speak to someone in “sales,” and request price information.
Make sure to inform vendors that the information is for estimation purposes only; other-
wise, they may claim they do not have enough information to determine exact prices.

Estimating the Costs of Custom Components

Custom components, which are parts designed especially for the product, are made by
the manufacturer or by a supplier. Most custom components are produced using the same
types of production processes as standard components (e.g., injection molding, stamping,
machining); however, custom parts are typically special-purpose parts, useful only in a
particular manufacturer’s products.

When the custom component is a single part, we estimate its cost by adding up the
costs of raw materials, processing, and tooling. In cases where the custom component is
actually an assembly of several parts, then we consider it a “product” in and of itself; to
arrive at the cost of this “product” we estimate the cost of each subcomponent and then
add assembly and overhead costs (these costs are described below). For the purposes of
this explanation, we assume the component is a single part.

The raw materials costs can be estimated by computing the mass of the part, allowing
for some scrap (e.g., 5 percent to 50 percent for an injection molded part, and 25 percent262 Chapter 13

EXHIBIT 1 3-7

Cost estimate
for the original
intake manifold.
Note that the
processing
costs for casting
and machining
reﬂect the costs
for a complete
casting line

and several
machining
stations.

 

Variable Cost

Materials 5.7 kg aluminum at $2.25/kg $12.83
Processing (casting) 150 units/hr at $530/hr 3.53
Processing (machining) 200 units/hr at $340/hr 1.70
Fixed Cost

Tooling for casting $160,000/tool at 500K units/tool (lifetime) 0.32
Machine tools and fixtures $1 ,800,000/|ine at 10M units (lifetime) 0.18
Total Direct Cost $18.56
Overhead charges $12.09
Total Unit Cost $30.65

 

to 100 percent for a sheet metal part), and multiplying by the cost (per unit mass) of the
raw material. A table of raw material costs is given in Appendix A (Exhibit 13-17).

Processing costs include costs for the operat0r(s) of the processing machinery as
well as the cost of using the equipment itself. Most standard processing equipment costs
between $25 per hour (a simple stamping press) and $75 per hour (a medium-sized,
computer-controlled milling machine) to operate, including depreciation, maintenance,
utilities, and labor costs. Estimating the processing time generally requires experience
with the type of equipment to be used. However, it is useful to understand the range of
typical costs for common production processes. For this purpose, tables of approximate
processing times and costs are given in Appendix B for a variety of stampings, castings,
injection moldings, and machined parts.

Tooling costs are incurred for the design and fabrication of the cutters, molds, dies, or
fixtures required to use certain machinery to fabricate parts. For example, an injection
molding machine requires a custom injection mold for every different type of part it pro-
duces. These molds generally range in cost from $10,000 to $500,000. Approximate tool-
ing costs are also given for the parts listed in Appendix B. The unit tooling cost is simply
the cost of the tooling divided by the number of units to be made over the life of the tool.
A high-quality injection mold or stamping die can usually be used for a few million parts.

The cost of the original intake manifold’s machined casting is estimated as shown in
Exhibit 13-7. Note that the estimate reveals that the cost is dominated by the expense of
the aluminum material. We will see that the redesign using a composite material not only
reduced the material costs but also eliminated machining and allowed many features to be
formed into the molded body.

Estimating the Cost of Assembly

Products made of more than one part require assembly. For products made in quantities
of less than several hundred thousand units per year, this assembly is almost always
performed manually. One exception to this generalization is the assembly of electronic
circuit boards, which is now almost always done automatically, even at relatively low
volumes.

Manual assembly costs can be estimated by summing the estimated time of each
assembly operation and multiplying by a labor rate. Assembly operations require from
about 4 seconds to about 60 seconds each, depending upon the size of the parts, theEXHIBIT 1 3-8
Assembly cost

estimation for
the PCV valve
assembly of

the redesigned
intake manifold.

Design for Manufacturing 263

 

 

Component Quantity Handling Time Insertion Time Total Time
Valve 1 1.50 1.50 3.00
O—rings 2 2.25 4.00 12.50
Spring 1 2.25 6.00 8.25
Cover 1 1.95 6.00 7.95
Total Time (seconds) 31.70
Assembly Cost at $45/hour $0.40

 

Source: Manual assembly tables in Boothroyd and Dewhurst, 1989

difficulty of the operation, and the production quantities. At high volumes, workers can
specialize in a particular set of operations, and special fixtures and tools can assist the
assembly. Appendix C contains a table of approximate times for manual assembly of
various products, which is helpful in estimating the range of times required for assembly
operations. A popular method for estimating assembly times has been developed over the
past 30 years by Boothroyd Dewhurst Inc. and is now available as a software tool. This
system involves a tabular information system for keeping track of the estimated assembly
times for each part. The system is supported by a comprehensive database of standard
handling and insertion times for a wide range of situations. Special software is also avail-
able for estimating the assembly cost of electronic circuit boards.

Assembly labor can cost from less than $1 per hour in low-wage countries to more than
$40 per hour in some industrialized nations. In the United States, assembly labor is likely to
cost between $10 and $20 per hour. (Each firm has different assembly labor cost structures,
and some industries, such as the automobile and aircraft industries, have substantially higher
cost structures.) These figures include an allowance for benefits and other worker-related ex-
penses and are meant to reﬂect the true cost to the firm of assembly labor.

Consider the redesigned intake manifold. The assembly cost of the PCV (positive
crankcase ventilation) valve assembly is estimated as shown in Exhibit 13-8.

Estimating the Overhead Costs

Accurately estimating overhead costs for a new product is difficult, and the industry prac-
tices are not very satisfying. Nevertheless, we will describe the standard industry practice
here and identify some of its problems. Applying the overhead estimation schemes used
by most firms is simple. Estimating the actual overhead costs incurred by the firm due to
a particular product is not. The indirect costs of supporting production are very difficult
to track and assign to particular product lines. The future costs of supporting production
are even more difficult to predict for a new product.

Most firms assign overhead charges by using overhead rates (also called burden rates).
Overhead rates are typically applied to one or two cost drivers. Cost drivers are param-
eters of the product that are directly measurable. Overhead charges are added to direct
costs in proportion to the drivers. Common cost drivers are the cost of any purchased
materials, the cost of assembly labor, and the number of hours of equipment time the
product consumes. For example, the overhead rate for purchased materials might be 10
percent and the overhead rate for assembly labor might be 80 percent. (Of course, pur-
chased components already have the vendor’s overhead included in the price; we only
add the purchasing overhead.) Under these conditions, a product containing $100 of
purchased components and $10 of assembly labor would incur $18 of overhead costs264 Chapter 13

(10 percent of $100 plus 80 percent of $10). Some typical overhead structures are given
in Appendix D for different types of products and firms.

The problem with this scheme is that it implies that overhead costs are directly pro-
portional to the cost drivers. A thought experiment reveals that this cannot always be so:
Most firms use “cost of purchased materials” as one cost driver, yet why would any of
their overhead costs actually change if a vendor of a $50 component raises its price to
$60? The answer is that they would not change at all. Overhead rates are used as a conve-
nient way to account for overhead costs, but this scheme can yield inaccurate estimates of
the true costs experienced by the manufacturer to support production.

This problem is partially addressed by activity-based costing (ABC) methods (Kaplan,
1990). Under the ABC approach, a firm utilizes more and different cost drivers and al-
locates all indirect costs to the associated cost drivers where they fit best. As a result, the
firm may have overhead rates applied to various dimensions of product complexity (such
as the number of different machining operations required or the number of different com-
ponents or suppliers needed), in addition to overhead on tooling, materials, machine time,
and direct labor. For the purposes of estimating manufacturing costs, the use of more cost
drivers not only allows more accurate overhead cost estimates to be made but also provides
important insights for reducing overhead costs by focusing attention on the cost drivers.

Step 2: Reduce the Costs of Components

For most highly engineered discrete goods the cost of purchased components will be the
most significant element of the manufacturing cost. This section presents several strate-
gies for minimizing these costs. Many of these strategies can be followed even without
the benefit of accurate cost estimates. In this case, these strategies become design rules,
or rules of thumb, to guide DFM cost reduction decisions.

Understand the Process Constraints and Cost Drivers

Some component parts may be costly simply because the designers did not understand the
capabilities, cost drivers, and constraints of the production process. For example, a designer
may specify a small internal corner radius on a machined part without realizing that physi-
cally creating such a feature requires an expensive electro-discharge machining (EDM) op-
eration. A designer may specify dimensions with excessively tight tolerances, without un-
derstanding the difficulty of achieving such accuracy in production. Sometimes these costly
part features are not even necessary for the component’s intended function; they arise out of
lack of knowledge. It is often possible to redesign the part to achieve the same performance
while avoiding costly manufacturing steps; however, to do this the design engineer needs to
know what types of operations are difficult in production and what drives their costs.

In some cases, the constraints of a process can be concisely communicated to design-
ers in the form of design rules. For example, the capabilities of an automatic laser cutting
machine for sheet metal can be concisely communicated in terms of allowable material
types, material thicknesses, maximum part dimensions, minimum slot widths, and cutting
accuracy. When this is possible, part designers can avoid exceeding the normal capabili-
ties of a process and thereby avoid incurring unusually high costs.

For some processes, the cost of producing a part is a simple mathematical function of
some attributes of the part, which would be the cost drivers for the process. For example,EXHIBIT 1 3-9
Cost estimate
for the
redesigned
intake manifold
(two moldings).

Design for Manufacturing 265

 

Variable Cost

Materials (manifold housing) 1.4 kg glass-filled nylon at $2.75/kg $ 3.85
Materials (intake runner insert) 0.3 kg glass—filled nylon at $2.75/kg 0.83
Molding (manifold housing) 80 units/hr at $125/hr 1.56
Molding (intake runner insert) 100 units/hr at $110/hr 1.10
Fixed Cost

Mold tooling (manifold housing) $350,000/tool at 1.5M units/tool $ 0.23
Mold tooling (intake runner insert) $150,000/tool at 1.5M units/tool 0.10
Total Direct Cost $ 7.67
Overhead charges $ 5.99
Total Unit Cost $13.66

 

a welding process could have a cost directly proportional to two attributes of the product:
(1) the number of welds and (2) the total length of welds the machine creates.

For processes whose capabilities are not easily described, the best strategy is to work
closely with the people who deeply understand the part production process. These manu-
facturing experts will generally have plenty of ideas about how to redesign components to
reduce production costs.

Redesign Components to Eliminate Processing Steps

Careful scrutiny of the proposed design may lead to suggestions for redesign that can result
in simplification of the production process. Reducing the number of steps in the part fabri-
cation process generally results in reduced costs as well. Some process steps may simply not
be necessary. For example, aluminum parts may not need to be painted, especially if they
will not be Visible to the user of the product. In some cases, several steps may be eliminated
through substitution of an alternative process step. A common example of this strategy is
“net-shape” fabrication. A net-shape process is one that produces a part with the final in-
tended geometry in a single manufacturing step. Typical examples include molding, casting,
forging, and extrusion. Frequently designers are able to use one of the net-shape processes
to create a part that is very close to the final requirement (near net shape) and may demand
only minor additional processing (e. g., drilling and tapping a hole, cutting to length).

The original intake manifold required an expensive casting, followed by several ma-
chining operations. The redesigned manifold is molded in two parts to net shape. The cost
estimate for these two moldings is shown in Exhibit 13-9. (Compare with Exhibit 13-7.)

Choose the Appropriate Economic Scale for the Part Process

The manufacturing cost of a product usually drops as the production volume increases.
This phenomenon is labeled economies of scale. Economies of scale for a fabricated
component occur for two basic reasons: (1) fixed costs are divided among more units and
(2) variable costs become lower because the firm can justify the use of larger and more
efficient processes and equipment. For example, consider an injection-molded plastic
part. The part may require a mold that costs $50,000. If the firm produces 50,000 units
of the part over the product’s lifetime, each part will have to assume $1 of the cost of the
mold. If, however, 100,000 units are produced, each part will assume only $0.50 of the266 Chapter 13

EXHIBIT
13-10

Total cost of

a hypothetical
part as a
function of

the number of
units produced
for injection
molding versus
machining.

Machining

 
 
  
 
    
   

$10/Unit Materials
and Processing

Injection
Molding

$1/Unit Materials
and Processing

Total Cost, $

ﬂ

Mold

 

 

Cost of
$10,000 Fixture |
i Cost of I
l / $1,000 :
T 1,000 Units

Number of Units Produced

cost of the mold. As production volumes increase further, the firm may be able to justify
a four-cavity mold, for which each cycle of the molding machine produces four parts
instead of one. As shown in Exhibit 13-9, the tooling costs for the redesigned intake man-
ifold are quite high; however, spread over the life of the tool, the unit fixed cost is small.

Processes can be thought of as incurring fixed and variable costs. Fixed costs are in-
curred once per part type regardless of how many parts are produced. Variable costs are
incurred each time a part is made. Processes with inherently low fixed costs and high
variable costs, such as machining, are appropriate when few parts will be made, while
processes with inherently high fixed costs and low variable costs, such as injection mold-
ing, are appropriate when many parts will be made. This concept is illustrated by the
graph in Exhibit 13-10. As shown in the exhibit, if production volume is expected to be
below 1,000 units, machining would be more economical; otherwise, injection molding
would incur lower total costs.

Standardize Components and Processes

The principle of economies of scale also applies to the selection of components and
processes. As the production volume of a component increases, the unit cost of the
component decreases. Quality and performance often increase as well with increasing
production quantities because the producer of the component can invest in learning and
improvement of the component’s design and its production process. For a given expected
product volume, the benefits of substantially higher component volumes can be achieved
through the use of standard components.

Standard components are those common to more than one product. This standard-
ization may occur within the product line of a single firm or may occur, via an outside
supplier, across the product lines of several firms. For example, the use of the 3.8-liter
V6 engine in several GM cars is an example of internal standardization. The use of a
common lO-millimeter socket head cap screw across several auto manufacturers is an
example of external standardization. In either case, all other things being equal, the
component unit cost is lower than if the component were used in only a single product.EXHIBIT
13-1 1

An example of
standardization
within a model.
Wheels of the
Ford Explorer
are the same on
the right and leﬁ
sides of the car.

Design for Manufacturing 267

 

 

Courtesy of Ford Motor Co.

The redesigned intake manifold is used on all of GM’s 3.8-liter V6 engines, even
though each particular vehicle application requires different EGR (exhaust gas recircula-
tion) return and vacuum hose routings. To accommodate this, the new intake manifold
has two standard interfaces, a vacuum port and an EGR port. For each vehicle model, a
custom vacuum block and EGR adapter are used. This allows the major component, the
intake manifold, to be standardized internally, rather than using a different manifold for
each vehicle.

Components may also be standardized within the same model. For example, most auto
manufacturers use the same type of wheel on the right and left side of their cars, even

though this causes directional “spokes” to have different orientations on different sides
(Exhibit 13-11).

Adhere to "Black Box" Component Procurement

A component cost reduction strategy used effectively in the Japanese auto industry is
called black box supplier design. Under this approach, the team provides a supplier with
only a black box description of the component—a description of what the component
has to do, not how to achieve it (Clark and Fujimoto, 1991). This kind of specification
leaves the vendor with the widest possible latitude to design or select the component for
minimum cost. An additional advantage of this approach is that it relieves the internal
team of the responsibility to engineer and design the component. Successful black box
development efforts require careful system-level design and extremely clear definitions
of the functions, interfaces, and interactions of each component. (See Chapter 10, Product
Architecture.)

For the redesigned intake manifold, the PCV valve assembly was designed by GM’s
AC Rochester Division, which supplies the component. The supplier was given system-
level specifications and complete responsibility for the performance of this subsystem.268 Chapter 13

Step 3: Reduce the Costs of Assembly

Design for assembly (DFA) is a fairly well-established subset of DFM that involves
minimizing the cost of assembly. For most products, assembly contributes a relatively
small fraction of the total cost. Nevertheless, focusing attention on assembly costs yields
strong indirect benefits. Often as a result of emphasis on DFA, the overall parts count,
manufacturing complexity, and support costs are all reduced along with the assembly
cost. In this section, we present a few principles useful to guide DFA decisions.

Keeping Score

Boothroyd and Dewhurst (1989) advocate maintaining an ongoing estimate of the cost
of assembly. In addition to this absolute score, they propose the concept of assembly
efficiency. This is measured as an index that is the ratio of the theoretical minimum as-
sembly time to an estimate of the actual assembly time for the product. This concept is
useful in developing an intuition for what drives the cost of assembly. The expression for
the DFA index is

DFA index _ (Theoretical minimum number of parts) X (3 seconds)

 

Estimated total assembly time

To determine the theoretical minimum number of parts, ask the following three questions
of each part in the proposed assembly. Only parts satisfying one or more of these condi-
tions must “theoretically” be separate.

1. Does the part need to move relative to the rest of the assembly? Small motions that can
be accomplished using compliance (e.g., elastic hinges or springs) do not count.

2. Must the part be made of a different material from the rest of the assembly for funda-
mental physical reasons?

3. Does the part have to be separated from the assembly for assembly access, replace-
ment, or repair?

The “3 seconds” in the numerator reﬂects the theoretical minimum time required to
handle and insert a part that is perfectly suited for assembly. One can think of this as the
average time (sustainable over a whole work shift) required to assemble a small part that is
easy to grasp, requires no particular orientation, and demands no special insertion effort;
such an operation is as fast as placing a ball into a circular hole with adequate clearance.

Integrate Parts

If a part does not qualify as one of those theoretically necessary, then it is a candidate for
physical integration with one or more other parts. The resulting multifunctional component
is often very complex as a result of the integration of several different geometric features
that would otherwise be separate parts. Nevertheless, molded or stamped parts can often
incorporate additional features at little or no added cost. Exhibit 13-12 shows the throttle-
body end of the redesigned intake manifold. Integrated into this component are the attach-
ments for the EGR return and the vacuum source block. These attachments use a molded
“push in and turn” geometry, eliminating the need for several threaded fasteners.
Part integration provides several benefits:

° Integrated parts do not have to be assembled. In effect, the “assembly” of the geometric
features of the part is accomplished by the part fabrication process.EXHIBIT
13-12

Integration of
several features
into a single
component.

The EGR return
and vacuum
source ports

are molded into
the redesigned
intake manifold.

269

Design for Manufacturing

 

 

 

 

Photo by Stuart Cohen

Integrated parts are often less expensive to fabricate than are the separate parts they
replace. For molded, stamped, and cast parts, this cost savings occurs because a single
complex mold or die is usually less expensive than two or more less complex molds
or dies and because there is usually less processing time and scrap for the single, inte-
grated part.

Integrated parts allow the relationships among critical geometric features to be con-
trolled by the part fabrication process (e.g., molding) rather than by an assembly pro-
cess. This usually means that these dimensions can be more precisely controlled.

Note, however, that part integration is not always a wise strategy and may be in con-

ﬂict with other sound approaches to minimizing costs. For example, the main intake man-
ifold assembly on the old design was a single cast piece, requiring extensive machining.
The team replaced this part with two less-expensive, injection-molded pieces. This is an
example of disintegrating parts in order to achieve benefits in the piece-part production
costs.

Maximize Ease of Assembly

Two products with an identical number of parts may nevertheless differ in required as-
sembly time by a factor of two or three. This is because the actual time to grasp, orient,
and insert a part depends on the part geometry and the required trajectory of the part
insertion. The ideal characteristics of a part for an assembly are (adapted from Boothroyd
and Dewhurst, 1989):

Part is inserted from the top of the assembly. This attribute of a part and assembly is
called z—axis assembly. By using z-axis assembly for all parts, the assembly never has
to be inverted, gravity helps to stabilize the partial assembly, and the assembly worker
can generally see the assembly location.270 Chapter 13

Part is self-aligning. Parts that require fine positioning in order to be assembled re-
quire slow, precise movements on the part of the assembly worker. Parts and assembly
sites can be designed to be self-aligning so that fine motor control is not required of
the worker. The most common self-alignment feature is the chamfer. A chamfer can be
implemented as a tapered lead on the end of a peg, or a conical widening at the open-
ing of a hole.

Part does not need to be oriented. Parts requiring correct orientation, such as a screw,
require more assembly time than parts requiring no orientation, such as a sphere. In
the worst case, a part must be oriented correctly in three dimensions. For example, the
following parts are listed in order of increasing requirements for orientation: sphere,
cylinder, capped cylinder, capped and keyed cylinder.

Part requires only one hand for assembly. This characteristic relates primarily to the
size of the part and the effort required to manipulate the part. All other things being
equal, parts requiring one hand to assemble require less time than parts requiring two
hands, which in turn require less effort than parts requiring a crane or lift to assemble.

Part requires no tools. Assembly operations requiring tools, such as attaching snap
rings, springs, or cotter pins, generally require more time than those that do not.

Part is assembled in a single, linear motion. Pushing in a pin requires less time than
driving a screw. For this reason, numerous fasteners are commercially available that
require only a single, linear motion for insertion.

Part is secured immediately upon insertion. Some parts require a subsequent secur-
ing operation, such as tightening, curing, or the addition of another part. Until the
part is secured, the assembly may be unstable, requiring extra care, fixtures, or slower
assembly.

Consider Customer Assembly

Customers may tolerate completing some of the product assembly themselves, espe-
cially if doing so provides other benefits, such as making the purchase and handling of
the packaged product easier. However, designing a product such that it can be easily and
properly assembled by the most inept customers, many of whom will ignore directions, is
a substantial challenge in itself.

Step 4: Reduce the Costs of Supporting Production

In working to minimize the costs of components and the costs of assembly, the team may
also achieve reductions in the demands placed on the production support functions. For
example, a reduction in the number of parts reduces the demands on inventory manage-
ment. A reduction in assembly content reduces the number of workers required for pro-
duction and therefore reduces the cost of supervision and human resource management.
Standardized components reduce the demands on engineering support and quality con-
trol. There are, in addition, some direct actions the team can take to reduce the costs of
supporting production.

It is important to remember that manufacturing cost estimates are often insensitive

to many of the factors that actually drive overhead charges. (Recall the discussion of
overhead cost estimation above.) Nevertheless, the goal of the design team in this respectDesign for Manufacturing 271

 

 

Drivers of Complexity Rev. 1 Rev. 2
Number of new parts introduced to the manufacturing system 6 5
Number of new vendors introduced to the manufacturing system 3 2
Number of custom parts introduced to the manufacturing system 2 3
Number of new "major tools" (e.g., molds and dies) introduced to the manufacturing system 2 2
Number of new production processes introduced to the manufacturing system 0 0
Total 13 12

 

EXHIBIT 1 3-1 3 Scorecard of manufacturing complexity.

should be to reduce the actual costs of production support even if overhead cost estimates
do not change.

Minimize Systemic Complexity
An extremely simple manufacturing system would utilize a single process to transform
a single raw material into a single part—perhaps a system extruding a single diameter of
plastic rod from plastic pellets. Unfortunately, few such systems exist. Complexity arises
from variety in the inputs, outputs, and transforming processes. Many real manufacturing
systems involve hundreds of suppliers, thousands of different parts, hundreds of people,
dozens of types of products, and dozens of types of production processes. Each variant
of suppliers, parts, people, products, and processes introduces complexity to the system.
These variants must usually be tracked, monitored, managed, inspected, handled, and in-
ventoried at tremendous cost to the enterprise. Much of this complexity is driven by the
design of the product and can therefore be minimized through smart design decisions.
Exhibit 13-13 shows a simple “scorecard” of manufacturing complexity useful for re-
minding designers of how the product design drives the complexity of the manufacturing
system. The team establishes a score for the initial design and then uses changes in the score
as a measure of success in reducing complexity. Note that the drivers given in the scorecard
shown are generic categories. In practice, the team develops this list (and may prioritize it
with weightings) based on the realities and constraints of the firm’s production environment.
Firms that use activity-based costing usually know quite well their primary drivers of com-
plexity, as these are the cost drivers they use in allocating overhead. As a simple substitute for
an accurate support cost model, such a scorecard allows the team to make informed decisions
without formally estimating the indirect costs of production.

Error Proofing

An important aspect of DFM is to anticipate the possible failure modes of the production
system and to take appropriate corrective actions early in the development process. This
strategy is known as error prooﬁng. One type of failure mode arises from having slightly
different parts that can be easily confused. Examples of slightly different parts are screws
differing only in the pitch of the threads (e.g., 4 X .70 mm and 4 X .75 mm screws) or in
the direction of turning (left- and right-handed threads), parts that are mirror images of
each other, and parts differing only in material composition.

We recommend either that these subtle differences be eliminated or that slight differ-
ences be exaggerated. Exhibit 13-14 shows an example of exaggerating subtle differences
between parts: the left and right versions of the reel lock on a Videocassette, which are272 Chapter 13

EXHIBIT

1 3-1 4

Left and right
reel locks inside
a videocassette
(top center).
The two nearly
identical parts
are color

coded to avoid
confusion.

 

 

 

Photo by Stuart Cohen

mirror images of each other, are molded in two different colors. Color coding allows the
parts to be identified easily and differentiated in materials handling and assembly.

Step 5: Consider the Impact of DFM Decisions
on Other Factors

Minimizing manufacturing cost is not the only objective of the product development
process. The economic success of a product also depends on the quality of the product,
the timeliness of product introduction, and the cost of developing the product. There may
also be situations in which the economic success of a project is compromised in order to
maximize the economic success of the entire enterprise. In contemplating a DFM deci-
sion, these issues should be considered explicitly.

The Impact of DFM on Development Time

Development time can be precious. For an automobile development project, time may be
worth as much as several hundred thousand dollars per day. For this reason, DFM deci-
sions must be evaluated for their impact on development time as well as for their impact
on manufacturing cost. While saving $1 in cost on each manifold would be worth perhaps
$1 million in annual cost savings, it would almost certainly not be worth causing a six-
month delay in an automobile program.

The relationship between DFM and development time is complex. Here, we note a few
aspects of the relationship. The application of some of the DFA guidelines may result in very
complex parts. These parts may be so complex that their design or the procurement of their
tooling becomes the activity that determines the duration of the overall development effort
(Ulrich et al., 1993). The cost benefits of the DFM decision may not be worth the delay in
project duration. This is particularly true for products competing in dynamic markets.

The Impact of DFM on Development Cost

Development cost closely mirrors development time. Therefore, the same caution about
the relationship between part complexity and development time applies to developmentResults

Design for Manufacturing 273

cost. In general, however, teams that aggressively pursue low manufacturing costs as an
integral part of the development process seem to be able to develop products in about the
same time and with about the same budget as teams that do not. Part of this phenomenon
certainly arises from the correlation between good project management practices and the
application of sound DFM methods.

The Impact of DFM on Product Quality

Before proceeding with a DFM decision, the team should evaluate the impact of the deci-
sion on product quality. Under ideal circumstances, actions to decrease manufacturing
cost would also improve product quality. For example, the new GM manifold resulted in
cost reduction, weight reduction, and improved engine performance. It is not uncommon
for DFM efforts focused primarily on manufacturing cost reduction to also result in im-
proved serviceability, ease of disassembly, and recycling. However, in some cases actions
to decrease manufacturing cost can have adverse effects on product quality (such as reli-
ability or robustness), so it is advisable for the team to keep in mind the many dimensions
of quality that are important for the product.

The Impact of DFM on External Factors

Design decisions may have implications beyond the responsibilities of a single develop-
ment team. In economic terms, these implications may be viewed as extemalities. Two
such externalities are component reuse and life cycle costs.

° Component reuse: Taking time and money to create a low-cost component may be of
value to other teams designing similar products. In general, this value is not explicitly
accounted for in manufacturing cost estimates. The team may choose to take an action
that is actually more costly for their product because of the positive cost implications
for other projects.

° Life cycle costs: Throughout their life cycles, certain products may incur some com-
pany or societal costs that are not (or are rarely) accounted for in the manufacturing
cost. For example, products may contain toxic materials requiring special handling in
disposal. Products may incur service and warranty costs. Although these costs may not
appear in the manufacturing cost analysis, they should be considered before adopting
a DFM decision. Chapter 12, Design for Environment, provides a detailed method of
addressing life cycle costs.

During the 1980s, design-for-manufacturing practices were put into place in thousands
of firms. Today DFM is an essential part of almost every product development effort. No
longer can designers “throw the design over the wall” to production engineers. As a result
of this emphasis on improved design quality, some manufacturers claim to have reduced
production costs of products by up to 50 percent. In fact, comparing current new product
designs with earlier generations, one can usually identify fewer parts in the new product,
as well as new materials, more integrated and custom parts, higher-volume standard parts
and subassemblies, and simpler assembly procedures.

A sketch of the redesigned intake manifold is shown in Exhibit 13-15. This DFM ef-

fort achieved impressive results. Exhibit 13-16 shows the cost estimate for the redesigned274 Chapter 13

EXHIBIT

1 3-1 5
The redesigned
intake manifold.

Courtesy of General
Motors Corp.

   

1993 3800 V-6 COMPOSITE UPPER INTAKE

CLOCK-N-LOCK CAP

 
 

INTEGRAL
FASTENERS (6)

 

 

 

Processing Total Unit Tooling Tooling Total Unit
Purchased (Machine Assembly Variable and Other Lifetime, Fixed Total
Component Materials + Labor) (Labor) Cost NRE, KS K units Cost Cost
Manifold
housing 3.85 1.56 5.41 350 1500 0.23 5.65
Intake runner
insert 0.83 1.10 0.13 2.05 150 1500 0.10 2.15
Steel inserts (16) 0.32 1.00 1.32 1.32
EGR adapter 1.70 0.13 1.83 1.83
PCV valve
Valve 0.85 0.04 0.89 0.89
O-rings(2) 0.02 0.16 0.18 0.18
Spring 0.08 0.10 0.18 0.18
Cover 0.02 0.10 0.12 0.12
Vacuum source
block 0.04 0.06 0.10 0.10
Total Direct
Costs 7.71 2.66 1.71 12.08 500 0.33 12.41
Overhead
Charges 1.16 4.79 3.08 0.50 9.52
Total Cost 21.93

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 3-1 6

Cost estimate for the redesigned intake manifold.Design for Manufacturing 275

intake manifold. (Compare with Exhibit 13-6.) The improvements over the previous de-
sign include:

Unit cost savings of 45 percent.

Mass savings of 66 percent (3.3 kilograms).

Simplified assembly and service procedures.

Improved emissions performance due to routing of EGR into the manifold.
Improved engine performance due to reduced air induction temperatures.
Reduced shipping costs due to lighter components.

Increased standardization across vehicle programs.

For this product, the manufacturing cost savings alone amount to several million dol-

lars annually. The other benefits listed above are also significant, although somewhat
more difficult to quantify.

 

Summary

Design for manufacturing (DFM) is aimed at reducing manufacturing costs while simul-
taneously improving (or at least not inappropriately compromising) product quality, de-
velopment time, and development cost.

DFM begins with the concept development phase and system-level design phase; in
these phases important decisions must be made with the manufacturing cost implica-
tions in mind.

DFM utilizes estimates of manufacturing cost to guide and prioritize cost reduction
efforts. Cost estimation requires expertise with the relevant production processes. Sup-
pliers and manufacturing experts must be involved in this process.

Since accurate cost estimation is very difficult, much of DFM practice involves mak-
ing informed decisions in the absence of detailed cost data.

Component costs are reduced by understanding what drives these costs. Solutions may
involve novel component design concepts or the incremental improvement of existing
designs through simplification and standardization.

Assembly costs can be reduced by following well-established design-for—assembly
(DFA) guidelines. Components can be redesigned to simplify assembly operations, or
components can be eliminated entirely by integration of their functions into other com-
ponents.

Reduction of manufacturing support costs begins with an understanding of the drivers
of complexity in the production process. Design decisions have a large impact on the
costs of supporting production. Choices should be made with these effects in mind,
even though overhead cost estimates are often insensitive to such changes.

DFM is an integrative method taking place throughout the development process and
requiring inputs from across the development team.

DFM decisions can affect product development lead time, product development cost,
and product quality. Trade-offs will frequently be necessary between manufacturing
cost and these equally important broader issues.276 Chapter 13

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

Two articles describe the needs, methods, and success of DFM in the 1980s.
Dean, James W, Jr., and Gerald I. Susman, “Organizing for Manufacturable Design,’
Harvard Business Review, J anuary—February 1989, pp. 28—36.

9

Whitney, Daniel E., “Manufacturing by Design,” Harvard Business Review, July—
August 1988, pp. 83—91.

There are numerous documented examples of DFM success. One classic example is the
story of the IBM Proprinter, described by Dewhurst and Boothroyd.
Dewhurst, Peter, and Geoffrey Boothroyd, “Design for Assembly in Action,”
Assembly Engineering, January 1987.

There are many references available to aid in component design, materials choice,

manufacturing process selection, and understanding of process capabilities. Here are several

sources that offer specific guidelines for hundreds of applications, materials, and processes.
Bolz, Roger W, Production Processes: The Productivity Handbook, fifth edition,
Industrial Press, New York, 198 1 .

Bralla, James G. (ed.), Design for Manufacturability Handbook, McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1999.

Cubberly, William H., and Ramon Bakerjian, Tool and Manufacturing Engineers
Handbook, Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearbom, MI, 1989.

Farag, Mahmoud M., Materials Selection for Engineering Design, Prentice Hall,
London, 1997.

Poli, Corrado, Engineering Design and Design for Manufacturing: A Structured
Approach, Butterworth-Heinemann, 2001.

Trucks, H. E., Designing for Economical Production, second edition, Society of
Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, MI, 1987.

Gupta et a1. provide a review of state-of—the-art manufacturability analysis methods and
related DFM research.
Gupta, Satyandra K., et al., “Automated Manufacturability Analysis: A Survey,”
Research in Engineering Design, Vol. 9, No. 3, 1997, pp. 168—190.

The Thomas Register is useful for identifying suppliers of components, tooling,
machinery, and other industrial products.
Thomas Register of American Manufacturers, Thomas Publishing Company, New
York, published annually. Also available on the Internet.

The most popular method for DFA is by Boothroyd and Dewhurst. Software is also
available to aid in estimating costs for both manual and automatic assembly, as well as a
wide range of component costs.
Boothroyd, Geoffrey, and Peter Dewhurst, Product Design for Assembly, Boothroyd
Dewhurst, Inc., Wakefield, RI, 1989.Exercises

Design for Manufacturing 277

Boothroyd, Geoffrey, Peter Dewhurst, and Winston A. Knight, Product Design for
Manufacture and Assembly, second edition, Marcel Dekker, New York, 2002.

Detailed research on automated assembly has resulted in guidelines for designing
products suited for assembly automation.
Boothroyd, Geoffrey, Assembly Automation and Product Design, Marcel Dekker,
New York, 1992.

Nevins, James L., and Daniel E. Whitney, Concurrent Design of Products and
Processes, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989.

Whitney, Daniel E., Mechanical Assemblies: Their Design, Manufacture, and Role in
Product Development, Oxford University Press, New York, 2004.

Kaplan and others describe the development of activity-based costing systems, which

provide insight into a firm’s cost drivers and facilitate more accurate cost estimation.
Kaplan, Robert S. (ed.), Measures for Manufacturing Excellence, Harvard Business
School Press, Boston, 1990.

Clark and Fujimoto conducted a comprehensive study of product development in the
world automobile industry. They provide an interesting analysis and discussion of the
concept of black box component design.
Clark, Kim B., and Takahiro Fujimoto, Product Development Performance: Strategy,
Organization, and Management in the World Auto Industry, Harvard Business School
Press, Boston, 1991.

Ulrich et al. describe the trade-off between development time and manufacturing cost.
They also describe an effort to model support costs in some detail.
Ulrich, Karl, Scott Pearson, David Sartorius, and Mark J akiela, “Including the Value
of Time in Design-for—Manufacturing Decision Making,” Management Science,
Vol. 39, No. 4, April 1993, pp. 429—447.

Ulrich and Pearson present a method for studying products, their costs, and some of the
many detail design decisions resulting in the artifacts we see.
Ulrich, Karl T., and Scott Pearson, “Assessing the Importance of Design through Product
Archaeology,” Management Science, Vol. 44, No. 3, March 1998, pp. 352—3 69.

1. Estimate the production cost for a simple product you may have purchased. Try
costing a product with fewer than 10 components, such as a ﬂoppy disk, a pen, a
jackknife, or a baby’s toy. Remember that one reasonable upper bound for your es-
timate, including overhead, is the wholesale price (between 50 percent and 70 per-
cent of retail).

2. Suggest some potential cost-reducing modifications you could make to improve the
product costed above. Compute the DFA index before and after these changes.

3. List 10 reasons why reducing the number of parts in a product might reduce produc-
tion costs. Also list some reasons why costs might increase.278 Chapter 13

Thought Questions

1. Consider the following 10 “design rules” for electromechanical products. Do these
seem like reasonable guidelines? Under what circumstances could one rule conﬂict
with another one? How should such a trade-off be settled?

a.
b.
C.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.

2. Is

Minimize parts count.
Use modular assembly.
Stack assemblies.
Eliminate adjustments.
Eliminate cables.

Use self-fastening parts.
Use self-locating parts.
Eliminate reorientation.
Facilitate parts handling.
Specify standard parts.

it practical to design a product with 100 percent assembly efficiency (DFA

index = 1.0)? What conditions would have to be met? Can you think of any products
with very high (greater than 75 percent) assembly efficiency?

3. Is it possible to determine what a product really costs once it is put into production? If
so, how might you do this?

4. Can you propose a set of metrics that would be useful for the team to predict changes
in the actual costs of supporting production? To be effective, these metrics must be
sensitive to changes in the design that affect indirect costs experienced by the firm.
What are some of the barriers to the introduction of such techniques in practice?Design for Manufacturing 279

Appendix A

 

Materials Costs

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 702
agree
1 3'1 7 7%; / —
8
Range of costs {,7 [96/
¢ —
for common ”8166/
. . ¢
_
eng1neer1ng 83% eqosl
. . 819/. ee/
materlals. Pr1ce 8375‘ masks _
ranges shown 849,-,” ’ee/ -
6'
correspond to 0 86‘ s’ee,
. 7
varlous grades G “70/8! _
l‘ 662/
and forms of 91/068 _
h ' 1 90 r»,
eac materla , 300 a, 0,,
- 30, 9/0,”. —
purchased 1n 500 0,0
bulk . . 59/ ’77 _
quant1t1es 5‘0 (0%
. s u
(201 1 pr1ces). 7%,”. ’77 _
)0 In
2 a
Source: Adapted from 59/0 . ’77 —
Davld G. Ullman, The 07/00
~ ~ 7 ’77
Mechamcag Deszgn A“ 0/30 —
Process, thlrd edltlon, 7700 6/198
McGraw—Hill, New 0.006,- s _-
York, 2003 76:9 900},
449 ’7/2, I
9 ’77
068/2, 51¢
4?
97
0
AW -
J(Caro 458
00% —
fp
c
p 44, j —
04/0/- /O,7 5‘
O /
p 0%,, 3 —
04/ 6pr
6‘ /
6’19 We], _
0/, 4/1] 6 6°
lie ’77/ 8/
«9,9 ”9 Ce —
0/7. . I-
[0360/0 ’77/0
0 9/-
l/ O
9/9 0/ _
s 07,5].
’76
—
62,
6/9/ 8 0%
4°
C, '00
‘90 "3’
‘ —
bore/$0
O
47’ _
$0.10 $1 $10 $100 $1,000

Dollars/Kilogram280 Chapter 13

Appendix B

 

Component Manufacturing Costs

The exhibits in this appendix show example components and their cost data for
computer-numerical control (CNC) machining (Exhibit 13-18), injection molding
(Exhibit 13—19), progressive die stamping (Exhibit 13-20), and sand casting and investment
casting (Exhibit 13-21). The purpose of these examples is to show, in general terms, what typ-
ical operations cost and how the cost structure of each process is affected by part complexity.

 

 

   
   
       
 
 
  

 

 

Fixed Costs Variable Costs Volume T013131? it
Setup: Material: I $9 ea.
0.75 hr. stock: 1.11 kg of 1 $75.00
at $60/hr. 6061 aluminum
. _ 10 $21.00
Tooling: I Processmg: I
programming: 6 min./unit 100 $15.50
0.25 hr. at $60/hr. at $60/hr.
Setup: Material: I $16 ea.
1.75 hr. stock: 1.96 kg of
at $60/hr. 6061 aluminum 1 $38600
Tooling: I Processing: I 10 $10250
programming: 55 min./unit 1 741
1.0 hr. at $60/hr. at $60/hr. 00 $ ' 5

....... V. i Fixtures: $150

Material:
5.5 hr. stock: 4.60 kg of

 

 

 

 

 

at $60/hr. ultra—high molecular 1 $64600
wei ht o| eth lene
g p y y 10 $241.00
Tooling: I Processing: I
. 1 2 .
programming: 2.85 hr./unit 00 $ 00 50
2.0 hr. at $60/hr. at $60/hr.
Setup: Materia|:| $12 ea.
2.0 hr. stock: 1.50 kg of 1 $612.00
at $60/hr. 6061 aluminum
. . 10 $396.00
Tooling:| Processmg: l
programming: 6 hr./unit 100 $374.40
........... 2.0 hr. at $60/hr. at $60/hr.

 

 

 

 

 

Source: Photos by Stuart Cohen. Examples and data courtesy of Ramco, Inc.

Notes: 1. Programming time is a one—time expense and is included here in tooling costs.
2. Material prices assume low volumes and include cutting charges.
3. Processing costs include overhead charges.

EXHIBIT 1 3-1 8 CNC machining cost examples
CNC machining example components and cost data.Design for Manufacturing 281

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fixed Costs Variable Costs Volume Total Unit
Cost
Setup: Material: $0.075 ea.
45 g of
linear low density 10K $1.915
polyethylene (LLDPF)
_ _ 100K $0.295
Tooling: Process1ng:
$18K 1000 pcs/hr. 1M $0.133
8 cavities/mold on an 1800 KN press
“0 actions at $40/hr.
Setup: Material: $0.244 ea.
10 g of
steel-filled 10K $1507
polycarbonate (PC)
. 100K 0.607
Tooling: Processmg: $
$10K 160 pcs/hr. 1M $0517
1 cavity/mold on a 900 KN press
no actions at $42/hr.
Setup: Material: $0.15 ea.
22 g of
modified polyphenylene 10K $2.125
oxide (PPO)
100K $0.505
Tooling: $18K Processing:
2 cavities/mold 240 pcs/hr. 1M $0343
no actions on an 800 KN press
3 retracting pins at $42/hr.
Setup: Material: $2.58 ea.
227 g of
polycarbonate (PC) 10K $11.085
with 8 brass inserts
100K $3.885
Tooling: $80K Processing:
1 cavity/mold 95 pcs/hr. 1M 353-155
1 action on a 2700 KN press
4 retracting pins at $48/hr.

 

Source: Photos by Stuart Cohen. Examples and data courtesy of Lee Plastics, Inc., and Digital Equipment Corporation

Notes: 1. Setup costs (only a few hours in each case) are negligible for high—volume injection molding.
2. Processing costs include overhead charges.

EXHIBIT 1 3-1 9 Injection molding cost examples
Injection molding example components and cost data.282 Chapter 13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fixed Costs Variable Costs Volume Totgégnit
Setup: Material: $0.040 ea.
2.2g
70/30 Brass 100K $0.281
_ 1 M $0.083
Tooling: Processmg:
$22K 3000 pcs/hr. 10M $0.063
on a 550 KN press
at $63/hr.
Setup: Material: $0.032 ea.
3.5 g
304 SST 100K $0.775
1 M 0.136
Tooling: Processing: $
$71K 4300 pcs/hr. 10M $0.072
on a 550 KN press
at $140/hr.
Setup: Material: $0.128 ea.
19.2 g
102 copper 100K $0.248
1M $0.149
Tooling: Processing:
$11K 4800 pcs/hr. 10M 350-140
on a 650 KN press
at $50/h r.
Setup: Material: $0.28 ea.
341 g galvanized steel
100K $2.516
1M $0.761
Tooling: Processing:
700 pcs/hr. 10M $0.585
$195K on a 1000 KN press
at $200/hr.

 

Source: Photos by Stuart Cohen. Examples and data courtesy of Brainin Advance Industries and other sources

Notes: 1. Setup costs (only a few hours in each case) are negligible for high—volume stamping.

2. Material weights represent the finished stampings. Material costs include scrap.

3. Hourly processing costs are not only driven by press size, but also can include ancillary processing equipment, such as in—die tapping.
4. Processing costs include overhead charges.

EXHIBIT 1 3-20

Stamping cost examples

Volume progressive die stamping example components and cost data.Design for Manufacturing 283

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fixed Costs Variable Costs Volume Total) 51:" i t
Setup: Material: $0.53 ea.
570 g of
gray cast iron 10 $180.91
_ _ 100 $18.91
Tooling: Processmg:
$1.8K 120 pcs/hr. 1000 $271
8 impressions/pattern at $46/hr.
no core
Setup: Material: $2.42 ea.
2,600 g of
gray cast iron 10 $243.95
100 27.95
Tooling: Processing: $
$2.4K 30 pcs/hr. 1000 $6.35
2 impressions/pattern at $46/hr.
1 core
Fixed Costs Variable Costs Volume T013131?”
Setup: Material: $0.713 ea.
260 g of
yellow brass 10 $163.21
100 $28.21
Tooling: Processing:
$1.5K 4 pcs/hr. 1000 $14.71
. . no cores at $50/hr.
c0 1 2 3 4 eff. s B 9 1H
Setup: Material: $0.395 ea.
180 g of
712 aluminum 10 $750.40
. 100 120.40
Tooling: Processing: $
$7K 1 pc/hr. 1000 $57.40
”W 3 cores at $50/hr.
cm 5 20
d.

 

Source: Photos by Stuart Cohen. Examples and data courtesy of Cumberland Foundry Co., Inc. (sand casting), and Castronics, Inc. (investment casting)

Notes: 1. Setup is not generally charged in costing.

2. Processing costs include overhead charges.

EXHIBIT 1 3-21 Casting cost examples

Sand casting (top) and investment casting (bottom) example components and cost data.284 Chapter 13

Terminology
The following terminology applies to all of the tables in this appendix:

° Setup is the work required to prepare the equipment for a production run. Setup costs
are charged for each run.

° Tooling costs are incurred in advance of the first production run, and tooling can usu-
ally be reused for later production runs. However, in very high-volume production
runs, tooling wears out and therefore is a recurring expense. Tooling costs may be
spread over the entire production volume or may be charged separately. CNC program-
ming time is generally also a one-time expense, like a tooling cost.

° Material types are listed for each part. Material weights and costs include processing
scrap and waste.

° Processing costs vary with the type of manufacturing equipment used and include
charges for both machine time and labor.

While fixed costs (setup and tooling) are sometimes billed separately from material
and processing costs, for these examples, fixed costs are spread over the production vol-
ume shown. Unit costs are calculated as

Setu costs + Toolin costs .
p g + Varlable costs

 

Total unit cost =
Volume

The cost rates given include overhead charges, so these data are representative of cus-
tom components purchased from suppliers.

Description of Processes

CNC machining includes computer-controlled milling and turning processes. CNC ma-
chines are highly flexible due to automatic tool-changing mechanisms, multiple work
axes, and programmable computer control. To produce a particular part, a machinist must
first program the cutting tool trajectories and tool selections into the machine’s computer.
Also, fixtures or other tooling may be utilized to produce multiple parts more efficiently.
Once the program is written and fixtures are made, subsequent production runs can be set
up much more quickly.

Injection molding is the process of forcing hot plastic under high pressure into a mold,
where it cools and solidifies. When the part is sufficiently cool, the mold is opened, the
part is ejected, the mold closes, and the cycle begins again. Mold complexity depends
highly on the part geometry; undercuts (features that would prevent the part from ejecting
out of the mold) are achieved using mold “actions” or “retracting pins.”

Progressive die stamping is the process of passing a sheet or strip of metal through a
set of dies to cut and/or form it to a desired size and shape. While some stampings require
only cutting, formed stampings are made by bending and stretching the metal beyond its
yield point, thereby causing permanent deformation.

Sand castings are created by forming a sand mold from master patterns (tooling in the
shape of the final part). Special binders are mixed with the sand to allow the sand to re-
tain shape when packed around the pattern to create a single-use mold. Internal cavities in
a casting can be created using additional sand cores inside the outer mold. Molten metalDesign for Manufacturing 285

is then poured into the mold where the metal cools and solidifies. Once cool, the sand is
broken off to reveal the metal casting. Sand castings generally require subsequent ma-
chining operations to create finished components.

Investment castings are made by first creating a temporary wax pattern, using master
tooling. The wax pattern is then dipped or immersed in plaster or ceramic slurry, which is
allowed to solidify. The form is then heated, melting out the wax and leaving behind only
the thin shell as a mold. Molten metal is then poured into the mold, where it cools and so-
lidifies. When the metal is cool, the mold is broken off to reveal the metal part.

Detailed process descriptions for the above and numerous other processes, as well as
more detailed cost estimating techniques, can be found in the reference books listed for
this chapter.286 Chapter 13

Appendix C

 

Assembly Costs

 

 

 

 

 

Product Pa rt Data Assembly Times
(Seconds)
No. of Parts Total
16 125.7

 

 

No. of Unique Parts

 

 

Slowest Part

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 9.7
No. of Fasteners Fastest Part

0 2.9
No. of Parts Total

34 186.5

No. of Unique Parts Slowest Part

25 10.7
No. of Fasteners Fastest Part

5 2.6
No. of Parts Total

49 266.0
No. of Unique Parts Slowest Part

43 14.0
No. of Fasteners Fastest Part

5 3.5
No. of Parts Total

56/17* 277.0/138.0*

 

 

No. of Unique Parts

 

 

Slowest Part

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

44/12* 8.0/8.0*
No. of Fasteners Fastest Part
0/0* 0.75/3.0*

 

 

 

*Data for the mouse are given as: total components (including electronic)/mechanical components only.

Source: Photos by Stuart Cohen. Data obtained by using Boothroyd Dewhurst Inc. DFA SOﬁIWaI'C

Notes: 1. This table gives manual assembly times, which can be converted to assembly costs using applicable labor rates.

2. Assembly times shown include times for individual part handling and insertion, as well as other operations such as subassembly handling and insertion,

reorientations, and heat riveting.

EXHIBIT 1 3-22 Assembly costs

Assembly data for common products. Obtained using Boothroyd Dewhurst Inc. DFA Software.Design for Manufacturing 287

 

Time (Seconds)

 

 

 

Time (Seconds)

 

 

 

 

t c t
Componen Min Max Avg omponen Min Max Avg
Screw Pin
EEW 7.5 13.1 10.3 3.1 10.1 6.6
Snap-fit Spring
El 3.5 8.0 5.9 W 2.6 14.0 8.3

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 3-23 Typical handling and insertion times for common components.

Appendix D

 

 

 

 

Source: Manual assembly tables in Boothroyd and Dewhurst, 1989

 

Cost Structures

 

Type of Firm

Cost Calculation

 

Electromechanical products manufacturer

(Traditional cost structure)

Precision valve manufacturer
(Activity—based cost structure)

Heavy equipment component manufacturer

(Activity—based cost structure)

Cost = (113%)
+ (360%)

Cost = (108%)

Cost = (110%)

 

++++++>< ++++>< ><><

Materials cost)
Direct labor cost)

(Direct labor cost)

Setup labor cost)

160%) X (Materials cost)
$27.80) >< (Machine hours)
$2,000.00) >< (Number of shipments)]

Materials cost)
109%) X [(211%) X (Direct labor cost)
$16.71) >< (Machine hours)
$33.76) >< (Setup hours)
$114.27) >< (Number of production orders)
$19.42) >< (Number of material handling loads)
$487.00) >< (Number of new parts added to the
system)]

 

Sources, top to bottom: Unpublished company source; Harvard Business School cases: Destin Brass Products Co., 9—190—089, and John Deere Component Works,

9—187—107

Notes: 1. This table shows total costs per customer order.
2. Materials costs include costs of raw materials and purchased components.

EXHIBIT 1 3-24 Typical cost structures for manufacturing firms.CHAPTER FOURTEEN

Prototyping

 

Courtesy of iRobot Corp.

EXHIBIT 1 4-1 PackBot mobile robot by iRobot.

289290 Chapter 14

 

Courtesy of iRobot Corp.

EXHIBIT 1 4-2 The PackBot ready for deployment in a military search operation.

The iRobot PackBot line of tactical mobile robots was designed by iRobot Corporation
to assist law enforcement and military personnel to conduct operations in dangerous
environments. For example, PackBot robots were used to help search for survivors in
the wreckage of the World Trade Center in September 2001. They have assisted military
operations around the world, and they are used by police for bomb retrieval and disposal.
The mobile chassis of the PackBot accepts a wide range of payloads, including a robotic
arm that can be fitted with a gripper, video camera, lighting, acoustic sensors, chemi-
cal and radiation detectors, or specialized equipment such as that needed for disarming
bombs. Exhibit l4-l shows the PackBot configured with a robotic arm, camera, gripper,
and fiber-optic communications tether. Exhibit 14-2 shows the PackBot ready for use in
the field.

The PackBot may be carried by military troops, thrown through a window, or dropped
off a fire truck into a wide range of challenging and unpredictable situations. In developing
the PackBot, the product development team at iRobot utilized various forms of prototypes
throughout the product development process. Prototypes not only helped develop a successful
product quickly, but also helped ensure the reliability of the PackBot in the field.

This chapter defines prototype, explains why prototypes are built, and then presents
several principles of prototyping practice. The chapter also describes a method for
planning prototypes before they are built. The PackBot is used as an illustrative ex-
ample throughout.Prototyping 291

Understanding Prototypes

Although dictionaries define prototype as a noun only, in product development practice
the word is used as a noun, a verb, and an adjective. For example:

0 Industrial designers produce prototypes of their concepts.
0 Engineers prototype a design.
° Software developers write prototype programs.

We define prototype as “an approximation of the product along one or more
dimensions of interest.” Under this definition, any entity exhibiting at least one aspect
of the product that is of interest to the development team can be viewed as a prototype.
This definition deviates from standard usage in that it includes such diverse forms of
prototypes as concept sketches, mathematical models, simulations, test components,
and fully functional preproduction versions of the product. Prototyping is the process of
developing such an approximation of the product.

Types of Prototypes

Prototypes can be usefully classified along two dimensions. The first dimension is the
degree to which a prototype is physical as opposed to analytical. Physical prototypes are
tangible artifacts created to approximate the product. Aspects of the product of interest
to the development team are actually built into an artifact for testing and experimentation.
Examples of physical prototypes include models that look and feel like the product,
proof-of—concept prototypes used to test an idea quickly, and experimental hardware used
to validate the functionality of a product. Exhibit 14-3 shows three forms of physical
prototypes used for diverse purposes. Analytical prototypes represent the product in a
nontangible, usually mathematical or visual, manner. Interesting aspects of the product
are analyzed, rather than built. Examples of analytical prototypes include computer
simulations, systems of equations encoded within a spreadsheet, and computer models
of three-dimensional geometry. Exhibit 14-4 shows three forms of analytical prototypes
used for diverse purposes.

The second dimension is the degree to which a prototype is comprehensive as opposed
to focused. Comprehensive prototypes implement most, if not all, of the attributes of a
product. A comprehensive prototype corresponds closely to the everyday use of the word
prototype, in that it is a full-scale, fully operational version of the product. An example of
a comprehensive prototype is one given to customers in order to identify any remaining
design ﬂaws before committing to production. In contrast to comprehensive prototypes,
focused prototypes implement one, or a few, of the attributes of a product. Examples of
focused prototypes include foam models to explore the form of a product and hand-built
circuit boards to investigate the electronic performance of a product design. A common
practice is to use two or more focused prototypes together to investigate the overall
performance of a product. One of these prototypes is often a “looks-like” prototype,
and the other is a “works-like” prototype. By building two separate focused prototypes,
the team may be able to answer its questions much earlier than if it had to create one
integrated, comprehensive prototype.

Exhibit 14-5 displays a plot with axes corresponding to these two dimensions. Several
different prototypes from the PackBot example are shown on this plot. Note that focused292 Chapter 14

EXHIBIT 1 4-3

Examples

of physical
prototypes in
the PackBot
project. (a)
Looks-like
model for
customer
communication
and approval,
(b) wheel
prototype under
load during
creep testing,
(c) sand test of
the complete
system.

Courtesy of iRobot
Corp.EXHIBIT 14-4

Examples

of analytical
prototypes of
the PackBot.
(a) 3D CAD
rendering
created for

a customer
proposal, (b)
finite-element
analysis of
Wheel spoke
geometry,

(c) dynamic
simulation
model.

Courtesy of iRobot
Corp.

(b)

 

 

Prototyping 293294 Chapter 14

prototypes can be either physical or analytical, but that for tangible manufactured products,
fully comprehensive prototypes must generally be physical. Prototypes sometimes contain
a combination of analytical and physical elements. For example, control hardware including
the user interface for the PackBot could be linked to a software simulation of the PackBot
dynamic motion. Some analytical prototypes can be viewed as being more “physical” than
others. For example, a video animation of the PackBot’s dynamic balance based on simula-
tion of the physical interactions of its components is, in one sense, more physical than a set
of equations approximating the overall balance of the same mechanism.

What Are Prototypes Used For?

Within a product development project, prototypes are used for four purposes: learning,
communication, integration, and milestones.

Learning Prototypes are often used to answer two types of questions: “Will it work?”
and “How well does it meet the customer needs?” When used to answer such questions,
prototypes serve as learning tools. In developing the wheels for the PackBot, the team
built focused-physical prototypes of the novel spiral spoke geometry of the wheels. The
wheels were mounted to a weighted platform and dropped at various heights to test the
shock absorption properties and the strength of the wheels. Exhibit 14-6 shows several of
the wheel prototypes and one of the impact tests. Also in development of the wheel design,
mathematical models of the spokes were analyzed to estimate the stiffness and strength of
the wheels. This is an example of a focused-analytical prototype used as a learning tool.

Physical Alpha Prototype for
A System Integration
0 Wheel ImpactTest O O O
O Gripper Geometry and System-Level Beta Prototype
Pad Coating PuIITest DropTest for FieIdTesting

O Testbed with New
Software on Old Model

0 Full-Scale Foam Model

 

Focused <

> Comprehensive

0 User Interface Hardware
Linked to Dynamic Simulation

O Color Rendering
0 3D CAD Model

   
      

  

0 Beam Bending Equations of Not

 

Wheel Spoke Geometry Full Dyném'c Generally
O FEA of Heat Dissipation SImuIatIon Feasible
0 Math Model of Motor V 0

Performance .

Analytlcal

EXHIBIT 1 4-5 Types of prototypes. Prototypes can be classified according to the degree to which they are physical and
the degree to which they implement all of the attributes of the product.Prototyping 295

 

Courtesy of iRobot Corp.

EXHIBIT 14-6 PackBot wheel prototypes (top) and impact testing (bottom).

Communication Prototypes enrich communication with top management, vendors,
partners, extended team members, customers, and investors. This is particularly true of
physical prototypes: a visual, tactile, three-dimensional representation of a product is
much easier to understand than a verbal description or even a sketch of the product. When
developing new payload capabilities for the PackBot, communication among engineers,
managers, suppliers, and customers is enhanced through the use of “look and feel”
prototypes. New customers often fail to appreciate the small size of the “crush zone”
into which the PackBot payload must fit; however, a physical model clearly illustrates
this space constraint. The rough physical prototype shown in Exhibit l4-3(a) was used to
communicate to early customers the physical size of the PackBot and the range of mobil-
ity of its camera support arm. This model was constructed from components using stereo-
lithography rapid prototyping technology, assembled, and painted to represent the actual
size and appearance of the product.

Integration Prototypes are used to ensure that components and subsystems of the product
work together as expected. Comprehensive physical prototypes are most effective as integra-
tion tools in product development projects because they require the assembly and physical
interconnection of all the parts and subassemblies that make up a product. In doing so, the296 Chapter 14

prototype forces coordination between different members of the product development team.
If the combination of any of the components of the product interferes with the overall func-
tion of the product, the problem may be detected through physical integration in a compre-
hensive prototype. Common names for these comprehensive physical prototypes are testbed,
alpha, beta, or preproduction prototypes. Two such prototypes of the PackBot are shown in
Exhibit 14-7. In the alpha prototype, the radios are visible in the center of the robot. In the
beta prototype, the radios were integrated into the body for protection from damage. Exten-
sive testing of the alpha prototype helped identify several improvements to the track system,
which was redesigned before the beta prototype was built. Further testing of the beta proto-
type included a wide range of field conditions, such as mud, sand, and water testing.

Prototypes also help integrate the perspectives of the different functions represented
on a product development team (Leonard-Barton, 1991). A simple physical model of the
form of a product can be used as the medium through which the marketing, design, and
manufacturing functions agree on a basic design decision.

Many software development processes use prototypes to integrate the activities of
dozens of software developers. Microsoft, for example, employs a “daily build,” in which
a new version of the product is compiled at the end of every day. Software developers
“check in” their code by a fixed time of day (e.g., 5:00 pm.) and a team compiles the
code to create a new prototype version of the software. The most recent version of the
software is then tested and used by everyone on the team, in a practice Microsoft calls
“eating your own dog food.” This practice of creating daily comprehensive prototypes en-
sures that the efforts of the developers are always synchronized and integrated. Any con-
ﬂicts are detected immediately and the team can never diverge more than one day from a
working version of the product (Cusumano, 1997).

Milestones Particularly in the later stages of product development, prototypes are used
to demonstrate that the product has achieved a desired level of functionality. Milestone
prototypes provide tangible goals, demonstrate progress, and serve to enforce the sched-
ule. Senior management (and sometimes the customer) often requires a prototype that
demonstrates certain functions before allowing the project to proceed. For example, in
many government procurements, a prototype must pass a “qualification test” and later

 

Courtesy of iRobot Corp.

EXHIBIT 1 4-7 Alpha (left) and beta (right) prototypes of the PackBot.Prototyping 297

Learning Communication Integration Milestones
Focused analytical . O O O
Focused physical . O O 0
Comprehensive physical . . o 0

EXHIBIT 1 4-8 Appropriateness of different types of prototypes for different purposes (0 = more appropriate,
0 = less appropriate). Note that fully comprehensive analytical prototypes are rarely possible for physical products.

a “first-article test” before a contractor can proceed with production. A major milestone
for the PackBot development was a test conducted by the US. Army. During this test the
PackBot prototype was thrown out of a moving vehicle and controlled by a soldier with
minimal training in an unknown environment. There could be no failures of the PackBot
system and its user interface in order to pass this test.

While all types of prototypes are used for all four of these purposes, some types of proto-
types are more appropriate than others for some purposes. A summary of the relative appropri-
ateness of different types of prototypes for different purposes is shown in Exhibit 14-8.

Principles of Prototyping

Several principles are useful in guiding decisions about prototypes during product
development. These principles inform decisions about what type of prototype to build and
about how to incorporate prototypes into the development project plan.

Analytical Prototypes Are Generally More
Flexible Than Physical Prototypes

Because an analytical prototype is a mathematical approximation of the product, it will
generally contain parameters that can be varied in order to represent a range of design
alternatives. In most cases, changing a parameter in an analytical prototype is easier than
changing an attribute of a physical prototype. For example, consider an analytical prototype
of the PackBot drivetrain that includes a set of equations representing the electric motor.
One of the parameters in the mathematical model of the motor is the stall torque. Varying
this parameter and then solving the equations is much easier than changing an actual
motor in a physical prototype. In most cases, the analytical prototype not only is easier to
change than a physical prototype but also allows larger changes than could be made in a
physical prototype. For this reason, an analytical prototype frequently precedes a physical
prototype. The analytical prototype is used to narrow the range of feasible parameters,
and then the physical prototype is used to fine-tune or confirm the design. See Chapter
15, Robust Design, for a detailed example of the use of an analytical prototype to explore
several design parameters.

Physical Prototypes Are Required to Detect
Unanticipated Phenomena

A physical prototype often exhibits unanticipated phenomena completely unrelated
to the original objective of the prototype. One reason for these surprises is that all of298 Chapter 14

the laws of physics are operating when the team experiments with physical prototypes.
Physical prototypes intended to investigate purely geometric issues will also have ther-
mal and optical properties. Some of the incidental properties of physical prototypes are
irrelevant to the final product and act as annoyances during testing. However, some of
these incidental properties of physical prototypes will also manifest themselves in the
final product. In these cases, a physical prototype can serve as a tool for detecting un-
anticipated detrimental phenomena that may arise in the final product. For example, in
a pull test of various PackBot gripper finger coatings, the team discovered that some of
the coatings with good grip characteristics had poor durability. Analytical prototypes,
in contrast, can never reveal phenomena that are not part of the underlying analytical
model on which the prototype is based. For this reason at least one physical prototype is
almost always built in a product development effort.

A Prototype May Reduce the Risk of Costly Iterations

Exhibit 14-9 illustrates the role of risk and iteration in product development. In many
situations, the outcome of a test may dictate whether a development task will have to be

Probability
of success
0.70

 
 
    
 
    

Build
Injection
Mold

   

Probability
of iteration
0.30

Conventional Process

Probability Probability
of success of success
0.70 0.95

      
  
  
 

    
 
 

  
  

  

Build
Prototype
Part

Build
Injection
Mold

 

 

 

Probability Probability
of iteration of iteration
0.30 0.05

Process with Prototyping

EXHIBIT 1 4-9 A prototype may reduce the risk of costly iteration. Taking time to build and test a prototype may
allow the development team to detect a problem that would otherwise not have been detected until after a costly
development activity, such as building an injection mold.Prototyping 299

repeated. For example, if a molded part fits poorly with its mating parts, the mold tooling
may have to be rebuilt. In Exhibit 14-9, a 30 percent risk of returning to the mold-building
activity after testing part fit is represented with an arrow labeled with a probability of
0.30. If building and testing a prototype substantially increases the likelihood that the
subsequent activities will proceed without iteration (e.g., from 70 percent to 95 percent,
as indicated in Exhibit 14-9), the prototype phase may be justified.

The anticipated benefits of a prototype in reducing risk must be weighed against
the time and money required to build and evaluate the prototype. This is particularly
important for comprehensive prototypes. Products that are high in risk or uncertainty,
because of the high costs of failure, new technology, or the revolutionary nature of
the product, will benefit from such prototypes. On the other hand, products for which
failure costs are low and the technology is well known do not derive as much risk-
reduction benefit from prototyping. Most products fall between these extremes.

Exhibit 14-10 represents the range of situations that can be encountered in different
types of development projects.

 

 

 

 

A
M h _ Analytical prototypes used
any compre_ enslve extensively.
prototypes bUII'L
:5: Carefully planned compre-
I hensive prototypes.
Examples: Sometimes the first unit built
x software, consumer products is actually sold.
0)
5 Examples:
3 airplanes, satellites, automobiles
«'6
E _
h
0
Ta
.2
C .
.5 One prototype may be Few or no comprehenswe
,2 built for verification. prototypes built.
3
3
Examples: Examples:
printed goods commercial buildings, ships
>
Low High

Cost of Comprehensive Prototype (Time or Money)

EXHIBIT 1 4-1 0 The use of comprehensive prototypes depends on the relative level of technical
or market risk and the cost of building a comprehensive prototype.300 Chapter 14

Conventional Process

Part Design

 

 

Mold Design

 

 

Mold Fabrication

 

Part Design

 

 

Prototype
Mold Design

 

 

 

Mold Fabrication I

Process with Prototyping

 

Time

EXHIBIT 1 4-1 1 Role of a prototype in expediting another step. Taking time to build a
prototype may enable more rapid completion of a subsequent step.

A Prototype May Expedite Other Development Steps

Sometimes the addition of a short prototyping phase may allow a subsequent activity to be
completed more quickly than if the prototype were not built. If the required additional
time for the prototype phase is less than the savings in duration of the subsequent activity,
then this strategy is appropriate. One of the most common occurrences of this situation
is in mold design, as illustrated in Exhibit 14-11. The existence of a physical model of
a geometrically complex part allows the mold designer to more quickly visualize and
design the mold tooling.

Conventional Process

System PC Board Software System Assembly
Design Fabrication Test and Test

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Process with Prototyping

 

 

System PC Board System Assembly
Design Fabrication and Test

l i

Prototype Software I

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Circuit Board Test

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 4-1 2 Use of a prototype to remove a task from the critical path.Prototyping 301

A Prototype May Restructure Task Dependencies

The top part of Exhibit 14-12 illustrates a set of tasks that are completed sequentially. It
may be possible to complete some of the tasks concurrently by building a prototype. For
example, a software test may depend on the existence of a physical circuit. Rather than
waiting for the production version of the printed circuit board to use in the test, the team
may be able to rapidly fabricate a prototype (e.g., a hand-built board) and use it for the
test while the production of the printed circuit board proceeds.

Prototyping Technologies

Hundreds of different production technologies are used to create prototypes, particularly
physical prototypes. Two technologies have emerged as particularly important in the past
20 years: three-dimensional computer modeling (3D CAD) and free-form fabrication.

3D CAD Modeling and Analysis

Since the 1990s, the dominant mode of representing designs has shifted dramatically
from drawings, often created using a computer, to 3D computer-aided design models,
known as 3D CAD models. 3D CAD models represent designs as collections of 3D
solid entities, each usually constructed from geometric primitives, such as cylinders,
blocks, and holes.

The advantages of 3D CAD modeling include the ability to easily visualize the
three-dimensional form of the design; the ability to create photo-realistic images for
assessment of product appearance; the ability to automatically compute physical prop-
erties such as mass and volume; and the efficiency arising from the creation of one and
only one canonical description of the design, from which other, more focused descrip-
tions, such as cross-sectional views and fabrication drawings, can be created. Through
the use of computer-aided engineering (CAE) tools, 3D CAD models have begun to
serve as analytical prototypes. In some settings this can eliminate one or more physi-
cal prototypes. When 3D CAD models are used to carefully plan the final, integrated
assembly of the product and to detect geometric interference among parts, this may
indeed eliminate the need for a full-scale prototype. For example, in the development
of the Boeing 777 and 787 jets, the development teams were able to avoid building
full-scale wooden prototype models of the planes, which had historically been used to
detect geometric interferences among structural elements and the components of vari-
ous other systems, such as hydraulic lines. Using a 3D CAD model of an entire product
in this manner is known, depending on the industry setting, as a digital mock-up, digital
prototype, or virtual prototype.

3D CAD models are also the underlying representation for many types of computer-
based analyses. Forms of CAE include finite-element analysis of thermal ﬂow or stress dis-
tribution, virtual crash testing of automobiles, kinematic and dynamic motion of complex
mechanisms, all of which have become more sophisticated every year. In the PackBot de-
velopment, engineers conducted finite-element analysis of structural integrity to understand
impact stresses at various drop and crash angles. Exhibit 14-13 shows one such analytical
result, based on a 3D CAD model of the PackBot. Engineers also computed heat ﬂows and
thermal dissipation performance using finite-element analysis based on 3D CAD models.302 Chapter 14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Courtesy of iRobot Corp.

EXHIBIT 1 4-1 3 Finite-element analysis of the PackBot side plate based on a 3D CAD model.
The image shows the stress distribution upon side impact at the rear wheel.

Free-Form Fabrication

In 1984, the first commercial free-form fabrication system was introduced by 3D
Systems. This technology, called stereolithography and dozens of competing technologies
that followed it, create physical objects directly from 3D CAD models, and can be
thought of as “three-dimensional printing.” This collection of technologies is often called
rapid prototyping. Most of the technologies work by constructing an object, one
cross-sectional layer at a time, by depositing a material or by using a laser to selectively
solidify a liquid or powder. The resulting parts are most often made from plastics, but
other materials are available, including wax, paper, ceramics, and metals. In some cases
the parts are used directly for visualization or in working prototypes. However, the parts
are often used as patterns to make molds or patterns from which parts with particular
material properties can then be molded or cast.

Free-form fabrication technologies enable realistic 3D prototypes to be created ear-
lier and less expensively than was possible before. When used appropriately, these pro-
totypes can reduce product development time and/or improve the resulting prod-
uct quality. In addition to enabling the rapid construction of working prototypes, these
technologies can be used to embody product concepts quickly and inexpensively, increasing
the ease with which concepts can be communicated to other team members, senior managers,
development partners, or potential customers. For example, the PackBot prototype shown in
Exhibit l4-3(a) was made of components fabricated using stereolithography in only four days.Prototyping 303

Planning for Prototypes

A potential pitfall in product development is what Clausing called the “hardware
swamp” (Clausing, 1994). The swamp is caused by misguided prototyping efforts, that
is, the building and debugging of prototypes (physical or analytical) that do not
substantially contribute to the goals of the overall product development project. One
way to avoid the swamp is to carefully define each prototype before embarking on an
effort to build and test it. This section presents a four-step method for planning each
prototype during a product development project. The method applies to all types of
prototypes: focused, comprehensive, physical, and analytical. A template for recording
the information generated from the method is given in Exhibit 14-14. We use the Pack-
Bot wheel prototype and impact test shown in Exhibit 14-6 as an example to illustrate
the method.

Step 1: Define the Purpose of the Prototype

Recall the four purposes of prototypes: learning, communication, integration, and mile-
stones. In defining the purpose of a prototype, the team lists its specific learning and
communication needs. Team members also list any integration needs and whether or
not the prototype is intended to be one of the major milestones of the overall product
development project.

For the wheel prototypes, the purpose was to determine the shock absorption
characteristics and robustness of the wheels using various geometry and materials. While
these learning prototypes were primarily focused on performance, the team was also
considering the manufacturing cost of the materials, some of which were not moldable
and must be machined.

Name of Prototype PackBot Wheel Geometry/Impact Test

Purpose(s) 0 Select final wheel spoke geometry and materials
based on strength and shock absorption
characteristics.

0 Confirm that wheels absorb shock to withstand
impact and protect the PackBot and its payload.

Level of Approximation 0 Correct wheel spoke geometry, materials, and
platform load.

Experimental Plan 0 Build 12 test wheels using six different materials,

each with two spoke shapes.
0 Mount the wheels to the test fixture.
0 Conduct impact tests at a range of drop heights.

Schedule ‘I August select wheel designs and materials
7 August complete design of test fixture
14 August wheels and test fixture constructed
15 August assembly completed
23 August testing completed
25 August analysis of test results completed

Courtesy of iRobot Corp.

EXHIBIT 1 4-1 4 Planning template for the PackBot wheel geometry/impact test prototypes.304 Chapter 14

Step 2: Establish the Level of Approximation of the Prototype

Planning a prototype requires definition of the degree to which the final product is to be
approximated. The team should consider whether a physical prototype is necessary or
whether an analytical prototype would best meet its needs. In most cases, the best proto-
type is the simplest prototype that will serve the purposes established in step 1. In some
cases, an earlier model serves as a testbed and may be modified for the purposes of the
prototype. In other cases, an existing prototype or a prototype being built for another pur-
pose can be utilized.

For the wheel prototype, the team decided that materials and geometry of the wheel
were critical attributes related to impact performance, so the prototype needed to be con-
structed carefully with these attributes in mind. However, other aspects of the wheel could
be ignored, including the production method (molding versus machining), the attachment
to the drive system and the track belt, and the color and overall appearance of the wheel.
A member of the team had previously explored an analytical model of the wheel spoke
bending performance and felt that the physical prototype was necessary to verify her
analysis. She had discovered that there was a basic trade-off between shock absorption,
which required more ﬂexible spokes, and strength of the wheel, which required larger
spokes. The team used the analytical prototype to determine the wheel spoke dimensions
that would be investigated with the physical prototype.

Step 3: Outline an Experimental Plan

In most cases, the use of a prototype in product development can be thought of as an
experiment. Good experimental practice helps ensure the extraction of maximum value
from the prototyping effort. The experimental plan includes the identification of the
variables of the experiment (if any), the test protocol, an indication of what measurements
will be performed, and a plan for analyzing the resulting data. When many variables
must be explored, efficient experiment design greatly facilitates this process. Chapter 15,
Robust Design, discusses design of experiments in detail.

For the wheel prototype tests, the team decided to vary only the materials and web
geometry of the spokes. Based on the analytical models, two spoke shapes were selected
for testing. Six different materials were also chosen, for a total of 12 test designs. The team
designed a weighted platform to which each wheel could be mounted and a test apparatus
for dropping the platform at various heights. They decided to instrument the platform to
measure the acceleration forces transmitted through the wheels to the PackBot upon im-
pact. After each test, they inspected the wheel for damage in the form of cracks or plastic
deformation before increasing the test height. These test results would not only be used to
choose the best spoke geometry and material, but also to improve the analytical model for
future use, which may eliminate further physical prototyping of modified wheel designs.

Step 4: Create a Schedule for Procurement,
Construction, and Testing

Because the building and testing of a prototype can be considered a subproj ect within the
overall development project, the team benefits from a schedule for the prototyping activ-
ity. Three dates are particularly important in defining a prototyping effort. First, the team
defines when the parts will be ready to assemble. (This is sometimes called the “bucket
of parts” date.) Second, the team defines the date when the prototype will first be tested.Prototyping 305

(This is sometimes called the “smoke test” date, because it is the date the team will first
apply power and “look for smoke” in products with electrical systems.) Third, the team
defines the date when it expects to have completed testing and produced the final results.

For the wheel prototypes, no assembly was involved, so when parts were available the
prototypes could be assembled and tested rather quickly. The team planned for eight days
of testing and two days of analysis.

Planning Milestone Prototypes

The above method for planning a prototype applies to all prototypes, including those
as simple as the wheel geometry and those as complex as the beta prototype of the en-
tire PackBot. Nevertheless, the comprehensive prototypes a team uses as development
milestones benefit from additional planning. This planning activity typically occurs in
conjunction with the overall product development planning activity at the end of the
concept development phase. In fact, planning the milestone dates is an integral part of
establishing an overall product development project plan. (See Chapter 18, Managing
Projects.)

All other things being equal, the team would prefer to build as few milestone proto-
types as possible because designing, building, and testing comprehensive prototypes con-
sumes a great deal of time and money. However, in reality, few highly engineered products
are developed with fewer than two milestone prototypes, and many efforts require four
or more.

As a base case, the team should consider using alpha, beta, and preproduction
prototypes as milestones. The team should then consider whether any of these milestones
can be eliminated or whether in fact additional prototypes are necessary.

Alpha prototypes are typically used to assess whether the product works as intended.
The parts in alpha prototypes are usually similar in material and geometry to the parts
that will be used in the production version of the product, but they are usually made with
prototype production processes. For example, plastic parts in an alpha prototype may be
machined or rubber molded instead of injection molded as they would be in production.

Beta prototypes are typically used to assess reliability and to identify remaining bugs
in the product. These prototypes are often given to customers for testing in the intended
use environment. The parts in beta prototypes are usually made with actual production
processes or supplied by the intended component suppliers, but the product is usually not
assembled with the intended final assembly facility or tooling. For example, the plastic
parts in a beta prototype might be molded with the production injection molds but would
probably be assembled by a technician in a prototype shop rather than by production
workers or automated equipment.

Preproduction prototypes are the first products produced by the entire production
process. At this point the production process is not yet operating at full capacity but
is making limited quantities of the product. These prototypes are used to verify pro-
duction process capability, are subjected to further testing, and are often supplied to
preferred customers. Preproduction prototypes are sometimes called pilot-production
prototypes.

The most common deviations from the standard prototyping plan are to eliminate one
of the standard prototypes or to add additional early prototypes. Eliminating a proto-
type (usually the alpha) may be possible if the product is very similar to other products306 Chapter 14

the firm has already developed and produced, or if the product is extremely simple.
Additional early prototypes are common in situations where the product embodies a new
concept or technology. These early prototypes are sometimes called experimental or en-
gineering prototypes. They usually do not look like the final product, and many of the
parts of the prototype are not designed with the intention of eventually being produced in
quantity.

Once preliminary decisions have been made about the number of prototypes, their
characteristics, and the time required to assemble and test them, the team can place these
milestones on the overall time line of the project. When the team attempts to schedule
these milestones, the feasibility of the overall product development schedule can be as-
sessed. Frequently a team will discover, when working backward from the target date
for the product launch, that the assembly and test of one milestone prototype overlaps or
is perilously close to the design and fabrication of the next milestone prototype. If this
overlapping happens in practice, it is the worst manifestation of the “hardware swamp.”
When prototyping phases overlap, there is little transfer of learning from one prototype
to the next, and the team should consider omitting one or more of the prototypes to allow
the remaining prototypes to be spread out more in time. During project planning, overlap-
ping prototyping phases can be avoided by beginning the project sooner, delaying product
launch, eliminating a milestone prototype, or devising a way to accelerate the develop-
ment activities preceding each prototype. (See Chapter 18, Managing Projects, for some
techniques for achieving this acceleration.)

 

Summary

Product development almost always requires the building and testing of prototypes. A
prototype is an approximation of the product on one or more dimensions of interest.

° Prototypes can be usefully classified along two dimensions: (1) the degree to which
they are physical as opposed to analytical and (2) the degree to which they are compre-
hensive as opposed to focused.

° Prototypes are used for learning, communication, integration, and milestones. While all
types of prototypes can be used for all of these purposes, physical prototypes are usu-
ally best for communication, and comprehensive prototypes are best for integration and
milestones.

° Several principles are useful in guiding decisions about prototypes during product
development:

0 Analytical prototypes are generally more ﬂexible than physical prototypes.
0 Physical prototypes are required to detect unanticipated phenomena.

0 A prototype may reduce the risk of costly iterations.

0 A prototype may expedite other development steps.

0 A prototype may restructure task dependencies.

0 3D CAD modeling and free-form fabrication technologies have reduced the relative
cost and time required to create and analyze prototypes.Prototyping 307

0 A four-step method for planning a prototype is:

1. Define the purpose of the prototype.

2. Establish the level of approximation of the prototype.

3. Outline an experimental plan.

4. Create a schedule for procurement, construction, and testing.

0 Milestone prototypes are defined in the product development project plan. The number
of such prototypes and their timing is one of the key elements of the overall develop-
ment plan.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

Clausing describes some of the pitfalls in prototyping, including the “hardware swamp.”
Clausing, Don, Total Quality Development, ASME Press, New York, 1994.

Leonard-Barton describes how prototypes are used for the integration of different product
development functions.
Leonard-Barton, Dorothy, “Inanimate Integrators: A Block of Wood Speaks,” Design
Management Journal, Vol. 2, No. 3, Summer 1991, pp. 61—67.

Cusumano describes Microsoft’s use of the “daily build” in its software development
process. The daily build is an extreme example of using comprehensive prototypes to
force integration.
Cusumano, Michael A., “How Microsoft Makes Large Teams Work Like Small
Teams,” Sloan Management Review, Fall 1997, pp. 9—20.

Schrage presents a view of product development centered around the role of prototyping
and simulation in the innovation process.
Schrage, Michael, Serious Play: How the World is Best Companies Simulate to
Innovate, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 2000.

Thomke explains the relationship between effective prototyping methods and

successful innovation. He argues that new technologies are changing the economics of

experimentation, leading to greater product development process performance.
Thomke, Stefan H., Experimentation Matters: Unlocking the Potential of New
Technologies for Innovation, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 2003.

Kelley and Littman’s presentation of IDEO’s highly successful product development
process includes a description of how IDEO uses prototypes to solve problems (learning),
to engage customers (communication), and to move projects forward through an iterative
process (milestones).

Kelley, Tom, with Jonathan Littman, T he Art of Innovation: Lessons in Innovation
from IDEO, America s Leading Design Firm, Doubleday, New York, 2001.

Two books written for general audiences contain very interesting accounts of prototyping.
Sabbagh’s book on the development of the Boeing 777 contains riveting accounts of brake308 Chapter 14

Exercises

system tests and wing strength tests, among others. Walton’s book on the development of
the 1996 Ford Taurus contains fascinating descriptions of prototyping and testing in the
automobile industry. Particularly engaging is the description of testing heaters in northern
Minnesota in midwinter, using development engineers as subjects.
Sabbagh, Karl, Twenty-First—Centary Jet: The Making and Marketing of the Boeing
777, Scribner, New York, 1996.

Walton, Mary, Car: A Drama of the American Workplace, Norton, New York, 1997.

Wall, Ulrich, and Flowers provide a formal definition of the quality of a prototype in
terms of its fidelity to the production version of a product. They use this definition to
evaluate the prototyping technologies available for plastic parts.
Wall, Matthew B., Karl T. Ulrich, and Woodie C. Flowers, “Evaluating Prototyping
Technologies for Product Design,” Research in Engineering Design, Vol. 3, 1992,
pp. 1 63—177.

Wheelwright and Clark describe the use of prototypes as a managerial tool for major
product development programs. Their discussion of periodic prototyping cycles is
particularly interesting.
Wheelwright, Stephen C., and Kim B. Clark, Revolutionizing Product Development:
Qaantam Leaps in Speed, Eﬂiciency, and Quality, The Free Press, New York, 1992.

1. A furniture manufacturer is considering a line of seating products to be fabricated
by cutting and bending a recycled plastic material available in large sheets. Create
a prototype of at least one possible chair design by cutting and bending a sheet of
paper or cardboard. (You may wish to design the chair with a sketch first, or just
start working with the sheet directly.) What can you learn about the chair design
from your prototype? What can’t you learn about the chair design from such a pro-
totype?

2. Position the chair prototype described in Exercise 1 on the plot in Exhibit 14-5. For
which of the four major purposes would a product development team use such a
prototype?

3. Devise a prototyping plan (similar to that in Exhibit 14-14) for investigating the
comfort of different types of handles for kitchen knives.

4. Position the prototypes shown in Exhibits 14-3, 14-4, 14-6, 14-7, and 14-13 on the plot
in Exhibit 14-5. Brieﬂy explain your reasoning for each placement.

Thought Questions

1. Many product development teams separate the “looks-like” prototype from the
“works-like” prototype. They do this because integrating both function and form is
difficult in the early phases of development. What are the strengths and weaknesses of
this approach? For what types of products might this approach be dangerous?Prototyping 309

. Today there are several technologies able to create physical parts directly from 3D
CAD files (e.g., stereolithography and selective laser sintering). How might a team
use such rapid prototyping technologies during the concept development phase of the
product development process? Might these technologies facilitate identifying customer
needs, establishing specifications, generating product concepts, selecting product
concepts, and/or testing product concepts?

. Some companies have reportedly abandoned the practice of doing a customer test with
the early prototypes of their products, preferring instead to go directly and quickly to
market in order to observe the actual customer response. For what types of products
and markets might this practice make sense?

. Is a drawing a physical or an analytical prototype?

. Microsoft uses frequent comprehensive prototypes in its development of software. In
fact, in some projects there is a “daily build,” in which a new version of the product is
integrated and compiled every day. Is this approach only viable for software products,
or could it be used for physical products as well? What might be the costs and benefits
of such an approach for physical products?CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Robust Design

 

 

 

Courtesy of Ford Motor Co.

EXHIBIT 15-1

Rear seat belt experiment. This experiment was run on a simulation model to explore many design
parameters and noise conditions.

311312 Chapter 15

Ford Motor Company safety engineers were working with a supplier to better understand
the performance of rear seat belts. In any conventional seat belt system with lap and
shoulder belts, if the lap portion of the belt rides upward, the passenger may slide beneath
it, potentially resulting in abdominal injury. This phenomenon, called “submarining,”
is related to a large number of factors, including the nature of the collision, the design
of the vehicle, the properties of the seats and seat belts, and other conditions. Based on
experimentation, simulation, and analysis, Ford engineers hoped to determine which of
the many factors were most critical to passenger safety and to avoiding submarining. The
image shown in Exhibit 15-1 depicts the model used in Ford’s simulation analysis.

This chapter presents a method for designing and conducting experiments to improve
the performance of products even in the presence of uncontrollable variations. This
method is known as robust design.

What Is Robust Design?

We define a robust product (or process) as one that performs as intended even under
nonideal conditions such as manufacturing process variations or a range of operating situ-
ations. We use the term noise to describe uncontrolled variations that may affect perfor-
mance, and we say that a quality product should be robust to noise factors.

Robust design is the product development activity of improving the desired perfor-
mance of the product while minimizing the effects of noise. In robust design we use
experiments and data analysis to identify robust setpoints for the design parameters we
can control. A robust setpoint is a combination of design parameter values for which the
product performance is as desired under a range of operating conditions and manufactur-
ing variations.

Conceptually, robust design is simple to understand. For a given performance target
(safely restraining rear-seat passengers, for example), there may be many combinations of
parameter values that will yield the desired result. However, some of these combinations
are more sensitive to uncontrollable variation than others. Because the product will likely
operate in the presence of various noise factors, we would like to choose the combination
of parameter values that is least sensitive to uncontrollable variation. The robust design
process uses an experimental approach to finding these robust setpoints.

To understand the concept of robust setpoints, consider two hypothetical factors affecting
some measure of seat belt performance, as shown in Exhibit 15-2. Assmne that factor A has
a linear effect, fA, on performance and factor B has a nonlinear effect, fB. Further consider
that we can choose setpoints for each factor: A1 or A2 for factor A, and B1 or B2 for factor B.
Assuming that the effects of fA and f3 are additive, a combination of A1 and B2 will provide
approximately the same level of overall performance as a combination of A2 and B1. Manu-
facturing variations will be present at any chosen setpoint, so that the actual value may not
be exactly as specified. By choosing the value of B1 for factor B, where the sensitivity of the
response to factor B is relatively small, unintended variation in factor B has a relatively small
inﬂuence on overall product performance. Therefore, the choice of B1 and A2 is a more robust
combination of setpoints than the combination of B2 and Al.

The robust design process can be used at several stages of the product development
process. As with most product development issues, the earlier that robustness can be
considered in the product development process, the better the robustness results can be.Robust Design 31 3

Response to fB Response to
Factor A Factor B

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

p
III I I ’

A1 A2 Bl BZ

EXHIBIT 1 5-2 Robust design exploits nonlinear relationships to identify setpoints where the product performance
is less sensitive to variations. In this example, the chosen value for the factor A setpoint does not affect robustness,
whereas that of factor B does. Choosing Bl minimizes the effect of variation in factor B on overall performance.

Robust design experiments can be used within the concept development phase as a way
to refine the specifications and set realistic performance targets. While it is beneficial to
consider product robustness as early as the concept stage, experiments for robust design
are used most frequently during the detail-design phase as a way to ensure the desired
product performance under a variety of conditions. In detail design, the robust design ac-
tivity is also known as parameter design, as this is a matter of choosing the right setpoints
for the design parameters under our control. These include the product’s materials, dimen-
sions, tolerances, manufacturing processes, and operating instructions.

For many engineering design problems, equations based on fundamental physical prin-
ciples can be solved for robust parameter choices. However, engineers generally cannot
fully model the kinds of uncertainties, variations, and noise factors that arise under real
conditions. Furthermore, the ability to develop accurate mathematical models is limited
for many engineering problems. For example, consider the difficulty of accurately modeling
the seat belt submarining problem under a wide variety of conditions. In such situations,
empirical investigation through designed experiments is necessary. Such experiments can
be used to directly support decision making and can also be used to improve the accuracy
of mathematical models.

In the case of the seat belt design problem, Ford’s engineers wished to test a range of
seat belt design parameters and collision conditions. However, crash testing is very ex-
pensive, so Ford worked with its seat belt supplier to develop a simulation model, which
was calibrated using experimental crash data. Considering the hundreds of possible design
parameter combinations, collision conditions, and other factors of interest, the engineers
chose to explore the simulation model using a carefully planned experiment. Although
simulation requires a great deal of computational effort, the simulation model still al-
lowed Ford engineers to run dozens of experiments under a wide variety of conditions,
which would not have been possible using physical crash testing.314 Chapter 15

For the Ford seat belt design team, the goals of this designed experiment were to learn:

° What combination of seat, seat belt, and attachment parameters minimizes rear-seat
passenger submarining during a crash.

0 How submarining is affected by uncontrollable conditions. What combination of de-
sign parameters is most robust to such noise factors?

Design of Experiments

The approach to robust design presented in this chapter is based on a method called
design of experiments (DOE). In this method, the team identifies the parameters that
can be controlled and the noise factors it wishes to investigate. The team then designs,
conducts, and analyzes experiments to help determine the parameter setpoints to achieve
robust performance.

In Japan during the 1950s and 1960s, Dr. Genichi Taguchi developed techniques to
apply DOE to improve the quality of products and manufacturing processes. Beginning
with the quality movement of the 1980s, Taguchi’s approach to experimental design
started to have an impact on engineering practice in the United States, particularly at Ford
Motor Company, Xerox Corporation, AT&T Bell Laboratories, and through the American
Supplier Institute (which was created by Ford).

Taguchi receives credit for promoting several key ideas of experimental design for the
development of robust products and processes. These contributions include introducing
noise factors into experiments to observe these effects and the use of a Signal-to-noise
ratio metric including both the desired performance (signal) and the undesired effects
(noise). While statisticians had been showing engineers how to run experiments for de-
cades, it was not until Taguchi’s methods were widely explained to the US. manufactur-
ing industry during the 1990s that experiments became commonly utilized to achieve
robust design.

DOE is not a substitute for technical knowledge of the system under investigation.
In fact, the team should use its understanding of the product and how it operates to
choose the right parameters to investigate by experiment. The experimental results
can be used in conjunction with technical knowledge of the system in order to make
the best choices of parameter setpoints. Furthermore, the experimental results can be
used to build better mathematical models of the product’s function. In this way, experi-
mentation complements technical knowledge. For example, Ford engineers have basic
mathematical models of seat belt performance as a function of passenger sizes and
collision types. These models allow Ford to size the mechanical elements and to de-
termine the belt attachment geometry. Based on empirical and simulation data, Ford’s
analytical models and seat belt design guidelines gain precision over time, reducing
the need for time-consuming empirical and simulation studies. Eventually, this techni-
cal knowledge may improve to the point where only confirming tests of new seat belt
configurations are required.

Basic experimental design and analysis for product development can be successfully
planned and executed by the development team. However, the field of DOE has many
advanced methods to address a number of complicating factors and yield more useful
experimental results. Development teams thus can benefit from consulting with a statisti-
cian or DOE expert who can assist in designing the experiment and choosing the best
analytical approach.Robust Design 31 5

The Robust Design Process
To develop a robust product through DOE, we suggest this seven-step process:

NQM¥9NE

Identify control factors, noise factors, and performance metrics.
Formulate an objective function.

Develop the experimental plan.

Run the experiment.

Conduct the analysis.

Select and confirm factor setpoints.

Reﬂect and repeat.

Step 1: Identify Control Factors, Noise Factors,
and Performance Metrics

The robust design procedure begins with identification of three lists: control factors, noise
factors, and performance metrics for the experiment:

Control factors: These are the design variables to be varied in a controlled manner
during the experiment, in order to explore the product’s performance under the many
combinations of parameter setpoints. Experiments are generally run at two or three
discrete levels (setpoint values) of each factor. These parameters are called control fac-
tors because they are among the variables that can be specified for production and/or
operation of the product. For example, the webbing stiffness and coefficient of friction
are control factors of interest for the experiment.

Noise factors: Noise factors are variables that cannot be explicitly controlled during
the manufacturing and operation of the product. Noise factors may include manufac-
turing variances, changes in materials properties, multiple user scenarios or operat-
ing conditions, and even deterioration or misuse of the product. If through special
techniques the team can control the noise factors during the experiment (but not in
production or operation), then variance can deliberately be induced during the experi-
ment to assess its impact. Otherwise, the team simply lets the noise take place during
the experiment, analyzes the results in the presence of typical variation, and seeks to
minimize the effects of this variation. For seat belts to be used with a range of seats,
the shape of the seat and the seat fabric must be considered noise factors. The goal is
to design a seat belt system that works well regardless of the values of these factors.

Performance metrics: These are the product specifications of interest in the experi-
ment. Usually the experiment is analyzed with one or two key product specifications
as the performance metrics in order to find control factor setpoints to optimize this
performance. These metrics may be derived directly from key specifications where
robustness is of critical concern. (See Chapter 6, Product Specifications.) For example,
how far the passenger’s back or buttocks move forward during the collision would be
possible performance metrics for the seat belt experiment.

For the seat belt design problem, the team held a meeting to list the control factors, noise
factors, and performance metrics. As Taguchi teaches, they placed these lists into a single
graphic, called a parameter diagram (or p-diagram), as shown in Exhibit 15-3.316 Chapter 15

EXHIBIT 1 5-3

Parameter
diagram used to
design the seat
belt experiment.
Bold text
indicates the
performance
metric used

and the control
factors and noise
factors chosen
for exploration.

 

 

 

 

 

Control Factors Passenger Performance Metrics
> Restraint —>
Belt webbing stiffness Process Back angle
Belt webbing friction Slip of buttocks
Lap belt force limiter Hip rotation

Forward knee motion

Noise Factors

Shape of rear seat

Type of seat fabric

Severity of collision

Wear of components
Positioning of passenger
Positioning of belts on body
Size of passenger

Type of clothing fabric

Web manufacturing variations
Latch manufacturing variations

Upper anchorage stiffness
Buckle cable stiffness
Front seatback bolster
Tongue friction
Attachment geometry

After listing the various factors, the team must decide which ones will be explored by
experiment. When a large number of parameters are suspected of potentially affecting
performance, the selection of critical variables can be substantially narrowed by using
analytical models and/or by running a screening experiment with two levels for each of
many factors. Then a finer experiment is run with two or more levels of the few param-
eters believed to affect performance.

Ford engineers considered the lists shown in Exhibit 15-3. They chose to focus the
experiment on exploration of seven seat belt parameters, holding constant the geometric
locations of the three attachment points. They decided to use “back angle at peak” as the
output metric, the angle that the passenger’s back makes with respect to vertical at the
moment of maximum restraint. Back angle is a smaller-is-better performance metric,
measured in radians.

A primary concern in this experiment was the effect of three particular noise factors:
seat shape, fabric type, and severity of collision. Through preliminary analysis, the team
found the best and worst combinations of these noise conditions with respect to the sub-
marining effect. These three noise factors were thereby combined into two extreme noise
conditions for the purposes of the experiment. This approach, known as compounded
noise, can be helpful when many noise factors must be considered. (See Testing Noise
Factors in step 3.)

Step 2: Formulate an Objective Function

The experiment’s performance metric(s) must be transformed into an objective function
that relates to the desired robust performance. Several objective functions are useful in
robust design for different types of performance concerns. They can be formulated either
as functions to be maximized or minimized, and they include:

0 Maximizing: This type of function is used for performance dimensions where larger
values are better, such as maximum deceleration before belt slippage. Common forms
of this objective function n are n = u or n = p}, where u is the mean of the experi-
mental observations under a given test condition.Robust Design 31 7

° Minimizing: This type of function is used for performance dimensions where smaller
values are better, such as back angle at peak deceleration. Common forms of this
objective function are n = p. or r] = 02, where 02 is the variance of the experimental
observations under a given test condition. Alternatively, such minimization objectives
can be formulated as functions to be maximized, such as T] = 1/ u or n = 1/02.

° Target value: This type of function is used for performance dimensions where values
closest to a desired setpoint or target are best, such as amount of belt slackening before
restraint. A common maximizing form of this objective function is T] = l/(p. — t)2,
where t is the target value.

° Signal-to-noise ratio: This type of function is used particularly to measure robust-
ness. Taguchi formulates this metric as a ratio with the desired response in the
numerator and the variance in the response as the denominator. Generally the mean
value of the desired response, such as the mean back angle at peak, is not difficult
to adjust by changing control factors. In the denominator, we place the variance of
this response (the noise response), which is to be minimized, such as the variance
in back angle resulting from noise conditions. In practice, reducing variance is
more difficult than changing the mean. By computing this ratio, we can highlight
robust factor settings for which the noise response is relatively low as compared to
the signal response. A common maximizing form of this objective function is
n = 10 log (pf/02).

The Ford statistician consulting with the team suggested two objective functions: the av-
erage back angle at peak and the range of the back angle at peak (the difference between
the maximum and minimum back angle at peak at the two noise conditions to be tested).
Both of these are objectives to be minimized. Together these two metrics would provide
deeper insight into the behavior of the system than either one alone.

Step 3: Develop the Experimental Plan

Statisticians have developed many types of efficient experimental plans. These plans lay
out how to vary the factor levels (values of the control factors and possibly also some
of the noise factors) in a series of experiments in order to explore the system’s behavior.
Some DOE plans are more efficient for characterizing certain types of systems, while
others provide more complete analysis.

Experimental Designs

A critical concern in designing experiments is the cost of setting up and running the
experimental trials. In situations where this cost is low, running a large number of trials
and using an experimental design with resolution high enough to explore more factors,
factor combinations, and interactions may be feasible. On the other hand, when the cost
of experimentation is high, efficient DOE plans can be used that simultaneously change
several factors at once. Some of the most popular experimental designs are listed below
and depicted in Exhibit 15-4. Each one has important uses.

° F all factorial: This design involves the systematic exploration of every combination of
levels of each factor. This allows the team to identify all of the multifactor interaction318 Chapter 15

Full-Factorial Matrix

 

 

1/2 Fractional Factorial Matrix

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A1 A2 A1 A2
B1 B2 B1 B2 B1 B2 B1 B2
C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2
D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2
F1 G1 x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x F1 G1 x x x x x x x x
E1 G2 x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x E1 G2
F2 G1 x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x F2 G1
G2 x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x G2 x x x x x x x x
G1 x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x G1 x x x x x x x x
F1 F1
E2 G2 x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x E2 G2 x
F2 G1 x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x F2 G1 x
G2 x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x G2 x x x x x x x x
1/4 Fractional Factorial Matrix 1/8 Fractional Factorial Matrix
A1 A2 A1 A2
B1 B2 B1 B2 B1 B2 B1 B2
C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2
D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2
F1 G1 x x x x x x x x F1 G1 x X
E1 G2 E1 G2 x X
F2 G1 F2 G1 x x
G2 x x x x x x x x G2
F1 G1 F1 G1
E2 G2 E2 G2 x x
F2 G1 F2 G1 x X
G2 G2 x x
L8 Orthogonal Array
(1 / 16 Fractional Factorial Matrix) One Factor at a Time
A1 A2 A1 A2
B1 B2 B1 B2 B1 B2 B1 B2
C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2 C1 C2
D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2
F1b1 x F1 G1 x x x x x
E1 G2 x E1 G2 x
F2 G1 X F2 G1 x
G2 x G2
F1 G1 X F1 G1 x
G2 x G2
E2 E2
F2 G1 X F2 G1
G2 x G2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Source: Fractional factorial layouts adapted from Ross, 1996

EXHIBIT 1 5-4 Several alternative experimental plans for seven factors (A, B, C, D, E, F, and G) at two levels
each. The full-factorial experiment contains 27 = 128 trials, While the L8 orthogonal array design contains only 8 trials,
denoted by the X marks in the matrices. The L8 orthogonal array plan is the one used for the seat belt experiment and is

shown in conventional row/column format in Exhibit 15-5.Robust Design 31 9

effects, in addition to the primary (main) effect of each factor on performance. This
type of experiment is generally practical only for a small number of factors and levels
and when experiments are inexpensive (as with fast software-based simulations or very
ﬂexible hardware). For an investigation of k factors at n levels each, the number of trials
in the full-factorial experiment is nk. Full factorial experimentation is typically infea-
sible for an experiment with greater than four to five factors.

° Fractional factorial: This design uses only a small fraction of the combinations used
above. In exchange for this efficiency, the ability to compute the magnitudes of all the
interaction effects is sacrificed. Instead, the interactions are confounded with other
interactions or with some of the main factor effects. Note that the fractional factorial
layout still maintains balance within the experimental plan. This means that for the
several trials at any given factor level, each of the other factors is tested at every level
the same number of times.

° Orthogonal array: This design is the smallest fractional factorial plan that still allows
the team to identify the main effects of each factor. However, these main effects
are confounded with many interaction effects. Nevertheless, orthogonal array layouts
are widely utilized in technical investigations because they are extremely efficient.
Taguchi popularized the orthogonal array DOE approach, even though statisticians
had developed such plans several decades earlier and the roots of these designs can
be traced back many centuries. Orthogonal array plans are named according to the
number of rows (experiments) in the array: L4, L8, L9, L27, and so on. The appendix
to this chapter shows several orthogonal array experimental plans.

° One factor at a time: This is an unbalanced experimental plan because each trial is
conducted with all but one of the factors at nominal levels (and the first trial having all
the factors at the nominal level). This is generally considered to be an ineffective way
to explore the factor space, even though the number of trials is small, 1 + k (n — 1).
However, for parameter optimization in systems with significant interactions, an adap-
tive version of the one-at-a-time experimental plan has been shown to be generally
more efficient than orthogonal array plans (Frey et al., 2003).

The Ford team chose to use the L8 orthogonal array experiment design because this plan
would be an efficient way to explore seven factors at two levels each. Subsequent rounds
of experimentation could later be used to explore additional levels of key parameters as

well as interaction effects if necessary. The orthogonal array experimental plan is shown
in Exhibit 15-5.

Testing Noise Factors

Several methods are used to explore the effects of noise factors in experiments. If some
noise factors can be controlled for the purpose of the experiment, then it may be possible
to directly assess the effect of these noise factors. If the noise factors cannot be controlled
during the experiment, we allow the noise to vary naturally and simply assess the prod-
uct’s performance in the presence of noise. Some common ways to test noise factors are:

0 Assign additional columns in the orthogonal array or fractional factorial layout to the
noise factors, essentially treating the noise as another variable. This allows the effects
of the noise factors to be determined along with the control factors.320 Chapter 15

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 5'5 Factor Description
Factor
assignments A Belt webbing stiffness: Compliance characteristic of the webbing measured in a
and the L8 tensile load machine
orthogonal array B Belt webbing friction: Coeffrcrent of friction, which Is a function of the belt weave
ex eriment and surface coating
d p. d f C Lap belt force limiter: Allows controlled release of the seat belt at a certain force level
es1gn use or D Upper anchorage stiffness: Compliance characteristic of the structure to which the

the seat belt . upper anchorage (D—loop) is mounted
exper1ment. Th1s E Buckle cable stiffness: Compliance characteristic of the cables by which the buckle
DOE plan tests is attached to the vehicle body
seven factors at F Front seatback bolster: Profile and stiffness of seatback where the knees may contact
two levels each. G Tongue friction: Coefficient of friction for the bearing area of the tongue, which slides
Each row was along the Webblng
replicated twice,
under the two
compounded
noise conditions, A B C D E F G N- N+
yielding 16 test
data points for 1 l l l l l l 1
analysis. 2 1 1 1 2 2 2 2

3 l 2 2 l l 2 2

4 l 2 2 2 2 l l

5 2 l 2 l 2 l 2

6 2 l 2 2 l 2 l

7 2 2 l l 2 2 l

8 2 2 l 2 l l 2

 

 

 

 

 

 

Use an outer array for the noise factors. This method tests several combinations of the
noise factors for each row in the main (inner) array. An example of this approach is
shown in the appendix, where the outer array consists of an L4 design, testing combi-
nations of three noise factors by replicating each row four times.

Run replicates of each row, allowing the noise to vary in a natural, uncontrolled man-
ner throughout the experiment, resulting in measurable variance in performance for
each row. With this approach, it is particularly important to randomize the order of the
trials so that any trends in the noise are unlikely to be correlated with the systematic
changes in the control factors. (See step 4.)

Run replicates of each row with compounded noise. In this method, selected noise fac-
tors are combined to create several representative noise conditions or extreme noise
conditions. This approach also yields measurable variance for each row, which can be
attributed to the effect of noise.

The Ford team chose to utilize the compounded noise approach in the seat belt experi-
ment. The team tested each row using the two combinations of the three noise factors

representing the best- and worst-case conditions. This resulted in 16 experimental runs for
the L8 DOE plan, as shown in Exhibit 15-5.Robust Design 321

 

 

A B C D E F G N— N+ Avg Range
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0.3403 0.2915 0.3159 0.0488
2 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 0.4608 0.3984 0.4296 0.0624
3 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 0.3682 0.3627 0.3655 0.0055
4 1 2 2 2 2 1 1 0.2961 0.2647 0.2804 0.0314
5 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 0.4450 0.4398 0.4424 0.0052
6 2 1 2 2 1 2 1 0.3517 0.3538 0.3528 0.0021
7 2 2 1 1 2 2 1 0.3758 0.3580 0.3669 0.0178
8 2 2 1 2 1 1 2 0.4504 0.4076 0.4290 0.0428

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 5-6 Data obtained from the seat belt experiment.

Step 4: Run the Experiment

To execute the experiment, the product is tested under the various treatment conditions
described by each row in the experimental plan. Randomizing the sequence of the experi-
mental runs ensures that any systematic trend over the duration of the experiment is not
correlated with the systematic changes to the levels of the factors. For example, if the ex-
periments of the L8 plan are not randomized, and the test conditions drift over time, this
effect may be incorrectly attributed to factor A because this column changes halfway
through the experiment. For some experiments, changing certain factors may be so diffi-
cult that all trials at each level of that factor are run together and only partial randomiza-
tion may be achieved. In practice, randomize the trials whenever practical, and when not
possible, validate the results with a confirmation run. (See step 6.)

In the seat belt experiment, each of the eight factor combinations in the L8 design was
tested under the two compounded noise conditions. The 16 data points containing the
back angle data are shown in Exhibit 15-6 in the columns titled N— and N+.

Step 5: Conduct the Analysis

There are many ways to analyze the experimental data. For all but the most basic analysis, the
team benefits from consulting with a DOE expert or from referring to a good book on statis-
tical analysis and experimental design. The basic analytical method is summarized here.

Computing the Objective Function

The team will have already devised the objective functions for the experiment and will gen-
erally have an objective related to the mean performance and the variance in performance.
Sometimes the mean and variance will be combined and expressed as a single objective in
the form of a signal-to—noise ratio. The values of the objective function can be computed for
each row of the experiment. For the seat belt experiment, the colLunns on the right side of the
table in Exhibit 15-6 show the computed objective function values (average back angle and
range of back angle) for each row. Recall that these are both objectives to be minimized.322 Chapter 15

EXHIBIT 1 5-7

Factor effects
charts for
the seat belt
experiment.

Computing Factor Effects by Analysis of Means

The most straightforward analysis to conduct will simply yield the main effect of each
factor assigned to a column in the experiment. These main effects are called the factor
eﬂects. The analysis of means involves simply averaging all the computed objective func-
tions for each factor level. In the L8 DOE example, the effect of factor level Al (factorA
at level 1) is the average of trials 1, 2, 3, and 4. Similarly, the effect of factor level E2 is
the average of trials 2, 4, 5, and 7. The results of an analysis of means are conventionally
shown on factor effects charts.

Exhibit 15-7 presents the factor effects charts for the seat belt example. These effects
are plotted for each of the objective functions. Exhibit 15-7(a) plots the average perfor-
mance at each factor level (the first objective function). This chart shows which factor lev-
els can be used to raise or lower the mean performance. Recall that back angle at peak is to
be minimized, and note that the chart suggests that factor levels [A1 B2 C2 El Fl Gl] will

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.44
E 0.42 — G2
.9
g 0.40 — A2
2 B1 C1
g: 0.38 — D1 D2 E2 F2
5 H 34E 34E
8 0.36— BZ C2
0:

A1
8: 0.34 —
{U
3 G1
5 0.32—
0.30
A B c D E F G
(a) Control Factors
0.05
75 C1
E 0.04 —
'0 A1
g D2 F
a) 1
E7 0-03 ‘ IQ: j/E E2 :l/E 62
<
B2 G1
x
0
g 002 _ D1 E1 F2
O
G)
2’ 0.01 — C2
‘5
n:
0.00
A B c D E F G

(b) Control FactorsRobust Design 323

minimize the average back angle metric. (Factor D appears to have no effect upon mean
performance.) However, these levels will not necessarily achieve robust performance.
Exhibit 15-7(b) is based on the range of performance at each factor level (the second ob-
jective function). This chart suggests that levels [A2 B2 C2 D1 E1 F2 G1] will minimize
the range of back angle at peak.

Taguchi recommends that the signal-to-noise ratio for each factor level be plotted in order
to identify robust setpoints. Because the signal-to-noise ratio includes the mean performance
in the numerator and the variance in the denominator, it represents a combination of these
two objectives or a trade-off between them. Rather than specifically plotting the signal-to-
noise ratio, many engineers and statisticians prefer to simply interpret the two objectives
together, giving more control over the trade-off. To do so, the factor effects charts shown in
Exhibit 15-7 can be compared in order to choose a robust setpoint in the next step.

Step 6: Select and Confirm Factor Setpoints

Analysis of means and the factor effects charts help the team determine which factors
have a strong effect on mean performance and variance, and therefore how to achieve
robust performance. These charts help to identify which factors are best able to reduce
the product’s variance (robustness factors) and which factors can be used to improve the
performance (scaling factors). By choosing setpoints based on these insights, the team
should be able to improve the overall robustness of the product.

For example, consider the effects of factor A on both average and range of back angle
in the experiment. The charts in Exhibit 15-7 show that level A1 would minimize back
angle, but level A2 would minimize the range of back angle, representing a trade-off be-
tween performance and robustness. A similar trade-off is evident in factor F. However, for
factors B, C, D, E, and G, there is no such trade-off, and levels B2, C2, D1, E1, and G1
minimize both objectives.

Using factors B, C, D, E, and G to achieve the desired robustness and factors A and F
to increase performance, Ford engineers selected the setpoint [A1 B2 C2 D1 E1 F1 G1].
As is usually the case, the chosen setpoint is not one of the eight orthogonal array rows
tested in the experiment. Given that this setpoint has never been tested, a confirmation run
should be used to ensure that the expected robust performance has been achieved.

Step 7: Reflect and Repeat

One round of experiments may be sufficient to identify appropriately robust setpoints.
Sometimes, however, further optimization of the product’s performance is worthwhile,
and this may require several additional rounds of experimentation.

In subsequent experimentation and testing, the team may choose to:

0 Reconsider the setpoints chosen for factors displaying a trade-off of performance ver-
sus robustness.

0 Explore interactions among some of the factors in order to further improve the
performance.

0 Fine-tune the parameter setpoints using values between the levels tested or outside this
range.324 Chapter 15

Caveats

° Investigate other noise and/or control factors that were not included in the initial
experiment.

As with all product development activities, the team should take some time to reﬂect on
the DOE process and the robust design result. Did we run the right experiments? Did we
achieve an acceptable result? Could it be better? Should we repeat the process and seek
further performance/robustness improvement?

Design of experiments is a well-established field of expertise. This chapter summarizes
only one very basic approach in order to encourage the use of experimentation in product
design to achieve more robust product performance. Most product development teams
should include team members with DOE training or have access to engineers and/or stat-
isticians with specialized expertise in design and analysis of experiments.

Obviously many assumptions underlie the type of analysis used in DOE. One basic as-
sumption made in interpreting analysis of means is that the factor effects are independent,
without interactions across the factors. In fact, most actual systems exhibit many interac-
tions, but these interactions are often smaller than the main effects. Verification of this as-
sumption is another motive for running confirming experiments at the chosen setpoints.

If necessary, experiments can be designed to specifically test interaction effects. This
type of experiment is outside the scope of this chapter. DOE texts generally provide a
number of ways to explore interactions across the factors, including the following:

0 Assign specific interactions to be explored in certain columns of the orthogonal array
(instead of using the column for a control factor).

0 Execute a larger fractional factorial design.
° Use an adaptive one-at-a-time experimental plan (Frey et al., 2003).

Many advanced graphical and analytical techniques are available to assist in interpreta-
tion of the experimental data. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) provides a way to assess the
significance of the factor effects results in light of the experimental error observed in the
data. ANOVA takes into account the number of observations made of each degree of free-
dom in the experiment and the scale of the results to determine whether each effect is sta-
tistically significant. This helps determine to what extent detailed design decisions should
be based on the experimental results. However, ANOVA makes many more assumptions
and can be difficult to set up properly, so it is also beyond the scope of this chapter. Refer
to a DOE text (Ross, 1996; Montgomery, 2007) or consult with a DOE expert to assist
with ANOVA.

 

Summary

Robust design is a set of engineering design methods used to create robust products and
processes.

° A robust product (or process) is one that performs properly even in the presence
of noise effects. Noises are due to many kinds of uncontrolled variation that may affectRobust Design 325

performance, such as manufacturing variations, operating conditions, and product
deterioration.

° We suggest an approach to the development of robust products based on design of ex-
periments (DOE). This seven-step process for robust design is:

. Identify control factors, noise factors, and performance metrics.
. Formulate an objective function.

. Develop the experimental plan.

. Run the experiment.

. Conduct the analysis.

. Select and confirm factor setpoints.

\IQLIl-PUJNH

. Reﬂect and repeat.

° Orthogonal array experimental plans provide a very efficient method for exploring the
main effects of each factor chosen for the experiment.

° To achieve robust performance, use of objective functions helps in capturing both mean
performance due to each control factor and variance of performance due to noise factors.

0 Analysis of means and factor effects charts facilitate the choice of robust parameter
setpoints.

° Because many nuances are involved in successful DOE, most teams applying these
methods will benefit from assistance by a DOE expert.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

Phadke provides numerous examples and practical advice on application of DOE. Ross
emphasizes insights gained through ANOVA analysis. Taguchi’s methods for experimental
design and details about orthogonal array experimentation plans are explained in several
texts, including Taguchi’s classic two-volume text translated into English.
Phadke, Madhav S., Quality Engineering Using Robust Design, Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989.
Ross, Phillip J., Taguchi Techniques for Quality Engineering, McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1996.

Taguchi, Genichi, Introduction to Quality Engineering: Designing Quality into
Products and Processes, Asian Productivity Organization (trans. and pub.),
Tokyo, 1986.

Taguchi, Genichi, System of Experimental Design: Engineering Methods to Optimize
Quality and Minimize Costs, two volumes, Louise Watanabe Tung (trans.), White
Plains, NY, 1987.

Grove and Davis present a thorough explanation of experimental design techniques in
engineering, including planning, running, and analyzing the experiments. A different
analysis of Ford’s seat belt experiment is included in this text, as well as many more
automotive applications of robust design.326 Chapter 15

Grove, Daniel M., and Timothy P. Davis, Engineering, Quality and Experimental
Design, Addison-Wesley Longman, Edinburgh Gate, UK, 1992.

Several excellent texts provide detailed explanations of the use of statistical methods,
fractional factorial experimental plans, analytical and graphical interpretations, and
response surface methods.
Box, George E. P., J. Stuart Hunter, and William G. Hunter, Statistics for
Experimenters: An Introduction to Design, Data Analysis, and Model Building, John
Wiley and Sons, New York, 1978.

Box, George E. P., and Norman R. Draper, Empirical Model Building and Response
Surfaces, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1987.

Montgomery, Douglas C., Design and Analysis of Experiments, sixth edition, John
Wiley and Sons, New York, 2007.

Recent research has renewed interest in one-at-a-time DOE plans. An adaptive one-factor-
at-a-time approach has been shown to yield better performance optimization than the
corresponding orthogonal array design for systems where the interaction effects are more
significant than the noise and error effects.
Frey, Daniel D., Fredrik Engelhardt, and Edward M. Greitzer, “A Role for One-
Factor-at-a-Time Experimentation in Parameter Design,” Research in Engineering
Design, 2003, Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 65—74.

DOE can be used in many aspects of product development. Almquist and Wyner explain
how carefully planned experiments are effective in evaluating and tuning parameters of
sales campaigns.
Almquist, Eric, and Gordon Wyner, “Boost Your Marketing ROI with Experimental
Design,” Harvard Business Review, Vol. 79, No. 9, October 2001, pp. 135—141.

Exercises

1. Design an experiment to determine a robust process for making coffee.

2. Explain why the 1/4—fractional-factorial and orthogonal array plans shown in Exhibit 15-4
are balanced.

3. Formulate an appropriate signal-to-noise ratio for the seat belt experiment. Analyze the
experimental data using this metric. Is signal-to-noise ratio a useful objective function
in this case? Why or why not?

Thought Questions

1. If you are able to afford a larger experiment (with more runs), how might you best uti-
lize the additional runs?

2. When would you choose not to randomize the order of the experiments? How would
you guard against bias?

3. Explain the importance of balance in an experimental plan.Robust Design 327

Appendix

 

Orthogonal Arrays

DOE texts provide several orthogonal array plans for experiments. The simplest arrays
are for two-level and three-level factor experiments. Using advanced techniques, DOE
plans can also be created for mixed two-, three-, and/or four-level factor experiments and
many other special situations. This appendix shows some of the basic orthogonal arrays
from Taguchi’s text Introduction to Quality Engineering (1986). These plans are shown in
row/column format, with the factor level assignments in the columns and the experimen-
tal runs in the rows. The numbers 1, 2, and 3 in each cell indicate the factor levels. (Alter-
natively, factor levels can be labeled as — and + for two-level factors or —, 0, and + for
three levels.) Recall that the orthogonal arrays are named according to the number of
rows in the design. Included here are the two-level arrays L4, L8, and L16 and the three-
level arrays L9 and L27. Also shown is a DOE plan using the L8 inner array for seven
control factors and the L4 outer array for three noise factors. This plan allows analysis of
the effects of the three noise factors.

Two-Level Orthogonal Arrays

L4: 3 Factors at 2 Levels Each

 

 

 

 

 

thA
NN_\_\

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

>
to
O
U
m
-n
C)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

muomth—x
NNNN—\—\_\_\
—\—\l\)l\)l\)l\)—\—\
N—‘N—‘N—‘NA
_\l\)—\l\)l\)—\N—‘
ANN—‘ANNA
N—\—\N—\l\)l\)—\328 Chapter 15

15 Factors at 2 Levels Each

L16

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10
11

 

 

12
13
14
15
16

 

 

 

 

 

 

Three-Level Orthogonal Arrays

4 Factors at 3 Levels Each

L9Robust Design 329

13 Factors at 3 Levels Each

L27

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10
11

 

 

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

22
23
24
25
26
27330 Chapter 15

Combined Inner and Outer Arrays

L8 x L4: 7 Control Factors and 3 Noise Factors at 2 Levels Each

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 Na

1 Nb

A B C D E F G 1 Nc
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
2 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
3 1 2 2 1 1 2 2
4 1 2 2 2 2 1 1
5 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
6 2 1 2 2 1 2 1
7 2 2 1 1 2 2 1
8 2 2 1 2 1 1 2CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Patents and Intellectual
Property

 

EXHIBIT 1 6-1
Hot beverage insulating sleeve by David W Coffin Sr. (US. Patent 5,205,473).

331332 Chapter 16

David Coffin, an individual inventor, developed a product concept and prototype for an
insulating sleeve that would make a hot beverage cup more comfortable to hold (Exhibit
16-1). The product opportunity arose in the 1980s after many food vendors had aban-
doned polystyrene foam hot beverage cups in favor of paper cups. The inventor was in-
terested in commercialization and/or licensing his invention and sought protection of
the intellectual property that he had created. This chapter provides an overview of intel-
lectual property in the context of product development and provides specific guidance
for preparing an invention disclosure or provisional patent application.

Within the context of product development, the term intellectual property refers to
the legally protectable ideas, concepts, names, designs, and processes associated with a
new product. Intellectual property can be one of the most valuable assets of firms. Unlike
physical property, intellectual property cannot be secured with lock and key to prevent its
unwanted transfer. Therefore, legal mechanisms have been developed to protect the rights
of intellectual property owners. These mechanisms are intended to provide an incentive
and reward to those who create new useful inventions, while at the same time encourag-
ing the dissemination of information for the long-run benefit of society.

What Is Intellectual Property?

Four types of intellectual property are relevant to product design and development.
Exhibit 16-2 presents a taxonomy of types of intellectual property. Although some areas
overlap, and all four types of intellectual property may be present in a single product, a
particular invention usually falls into one of these categories.

° Patent: A patent is a temporary monopoly granted by a government to an inventor
to exclude others from using an invention. In the United States, a patent expires
20 years from the filing date. Most of the balance of this chapter focuses on patents.

° Trademark: A trademark is an exclusive right granted by a government to a trademark
owner to use a specific name or symbol in association with a class of products or
services. In the context of product development, trademarks are typically brands or
product names. For example, JavaJacket is a trademark for an insulated cup holder,
and companies other than Java Jacket, Inc., may not make unauthorized use of the
word JavaJacket to refer to their own cup-holder products. In the United States,
registration of a trademark is possible, but not strictly necessary to preserve the
trademark rights. In most other countries, the rights of a trademark are gained
through registration.

° Trade secret: A trade secret is information used in a trade or business that offers its
owner a competitive advantage and that can be kept secret. A trade secret is not a right
conferred by a government but is the result of vigilance on the part of an organization
in preventing the dissemination of its proprietary information. Perhaps the most fa-
mous trade secret is the formula for the beverage Coca-Cola.

° Copyright: A copyright is an exclusive right granted by a government to copy and
distribute an original work of expression, whether literature, graphics, music, art, en-
tertainment, or software. Registration of a copyright is possible but not necessary. A
copyright comes into being upon the first tangible expression of the work and lasts for
up to 95 years.Patents and Intellectual Property 333

Intellectual Property

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Patents
Utility Design Plant Trade
Patents Patents Patents Trademarks Copyright Secret

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Product Design
‘1: rl Development

     

Fig 10

1. Useful Ornamental New Word or Original Proprietary
2. Novel Design Only Plant Symbol Work of and Useful
3. Nonobvious Expression

 

may be registered, but

requires formal application
not necessary

not registered

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 6-2 Taxonomy of types of intellectual property relevant to product design and development.

This chapter focuses on patents. Appendix A to this chapter brieﬂy discusses trademarks.
We do not devote substantial attention here to copyrights and trade secrets, but several
references to other resources appear at the end of the chapter.

Overview of Patents

For most engineered goods, two basic types of patents are relevant: design patents and
utility patents. (A third type of patent covers plants.) Design patents provide the legal
right to exclude someone from producing and selling a product with the identical or-
namental design described by the design patent. A design patent can be thought of as a
“copyright” for the ornamental design of a product. Because design patents must be lim-
ited to ornamental design, for most engineered goods, design patents are of very limited
value. For this reason, the chapter focuses further on utility patents.

Patent law in most of the world evolved from English law and so patent laws in differ-
ent countries are somewhat similar. This chapter uses US. law as a reference point, and so
readers with intentions to obtain patents in other countries should carefully investigate the
laws in those countries.334 Chapter 16

Utility Patents

United States law allows for patenting of an invention that relates to a new process, ma-
chine, article of manufacture, composition of matter, or a new and useful improvement of
one of these things. Fortunately, these categories include almost all inventions embodied
by new products. Note that inventions embodied in software are sometimes patented, but
usually the invention is described as a process or machine. Exhibit 16-3 shows the first
page of a patent for the insulating sleeve invented by Coffin.

In addition, the law requires that patented inventions be:

° Useful: The patented invention must be useful to someone in some context.

° Novel: Novel inventions are those that are not known publicly and therefore are not
evident in existing products, publications, or prior patents. The definition of novelty re-
lates to disclosures of the actual invention to be patented as well. In the United States,
an invention to be patented must not have been revealed to the public more than a year
before the patent is filed.

° Nonobvious: Patent law defines obvious inventions as those that would be clearly evi-
dent to those with “ordinary skill in the art” who faced the same problem as the inventor.

Usefulness is rarely a hurdle to obtaining a patent. However, the requirements that an
invention be novel and nonobvious are the most common barriers to obtaining a patent.

About two-thirds of applications filed for patents result in issued patents. However, an
issued patent is not necessarily valid. A patent may be challenged in a government court
by a competitor at some point in the future. The validity of a patent is determined by,
among other factors, the adequacy of the description in the patent and the novelty of the
invention relative to the prior art. A tiny fraction of patents—a few hundred per year in
the United States—are ever challenged in court. Of those challenged in recent years, just
over half have been found to be valid.

An inventor associated with a patent is a person who actually created the invention
individually or in collaboration with other inventors. In some cases the inventor is also the
owner of the intellectual property. However, in most cases, the patent is assigned to some
other entity, usually the inventors employer. The actual intellectual property rights associ-
ated with a patent belong to the owner of the patent and not necessarily to the inventor.
(Appendix B to this chapter provides some advice to individual inventors interested in
commercializing their inventions.)

A patent owner has the right to exclude others from using, making, selling, or import-
ing an infringing product. This is an oﬂensive right, which requires that the patent owner
sue the infringer. There are also defensive rights associated with patents. Any invention
described in a patent, whether part of the claimed invention or not, is considered by the
legal system to be known publicly and forms part of the prior art. This disclosure is a de-
fensive act blocking a competitor from patenting the disclosed invention.

Preparing a Disclosure

This chapter is focused on a process for preparing an invention disclosure—in essence a
detailed description of an invention. This disclosure will be in the form of a patent appli-
cation, which can serve as a provisional patent application and with relatively little addi-
tional work could be a regular patent application. It is possible, even typical, for a patentPatents and Intellectual Property 335

 

U5005205473A

United States Patent [19] [11] Patent Number: 5,205,473
Cofﬁn, Sr. [45] Date of Patent: Apr. 27, 1993
[54] RECYCLABLE CORRUGATED BEVERAGE 2,969,901 1/1961 Behrens ............. 229/1.3 B

CONTAINER AND HOLDER 3,237,834 3/1966 Davis et al ............ 229/1.3 B
[75] Inventor: David W. Cofﬁn, Sr., Fayetteville, N.Y. $32: 1313;: mfg“- et a] """""" 53/527
[73] Assignee: Design By Us Company, Philadelphia, Pa. 3:890:762 6/1975 Ernst et al.
[21] Appl. No.: 854,425 3,908,523 9/1975 Shikays ............. 229/1.5 B
[22] Filed: Mar. 19, 1992 4,080,880 3/1978 Shlkay ............... 493/296

4,146,660 3/1979 Hall et al.
[51] Int. Cl oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo B65D 3/28 4,176,034 11/1979 Kelley .................. 209/8
[52] U.S. CI ................ 229/1.5 B; 206/813; 220/441; 5,009,326 4/1991 ReaVeS et a].
220/DIG- 303 229/1-5 H3 229/DIG- 23 493/2963493/907 5,092,485 3/1992 Lee ................. 229/1.3 B
[38] Field of Search ..... 229/1.5 B, 1.3 H, 4.5, 229/DIG. 2;
220/441, 671, 737—739, DIG. 30; 493/287, OTHER PUBLICATIONS
296, 907, 908; 209/8, 47, 215; 206/813 “The Wiley Encyclopedia of Packaging Technology”, John

[56] References Cited Wlley & Sons, pp. 66-69, 1986.

EXHIBIT 1 6-3 The first page of US. Patent 5,205,473.

1,732,322
1,771,765
2,266,828
2,300,473
2,503,815
2,617,549
2,641,402
2,661,889

US. PATENT DOCUMENTS

10/1929
7/1930
12/1941
1 1/ 1942
3/ 1950
1 1/ 1952
6/1953
12/ 1953

Wilson et al. ...... 220/DIG. 30
Benson ............... 229/4.5
Sykes ............... 229/1.5 B
Winkle ............... 229/4.5
Harman

Egger

Bruun ............... 229/4.5
Phinney .............. 229/4.5

Primary Examiner—Gary E. Elkins
Attorney, Agent, or Firm—Synnestvedt & Lochner

ABSTRACT

Corrugated beverage containers and holders are which
employ recyclable materials, but provide ﬂuting structures
for containing insulating air. These products are easy to
hold and have a lesser impact on the environment than
polystyrene containers.

[57]

18 Claims, 8 Drawing Sheets336 Chapter 16

attorney to do much of the work described in the chapter. However, our belief is that hav-
ing the inventor draft a detailed disclosure is the best way to communicate the inventor’s
knowledge, even though in most cases a patent attorney will revise the disclosure to
prepare the formal patent application. Although many readers will be able to complete a
provisional patent application from the guidance provided here, this chapter is not a sub-
stitute for competent legal advice. Inventors pursuing serious commercial opportunities
should consult with a patent attorney after preparing their disclosure.
The steps in the process are:

Formulate a strategy and plan.

Study prior inventions.

Outline claims.

Write the description of the invention.
Refine claims.

Pursue application.

N9M¥WNE

Reﬂect on the results and the process.

Step 1: Formulate a Strategy and Plan

In formulating a patent strategy and plan, a product development team must decide on
the timing of the filing of a patent application, the type of application to be filed, and the
scope of the application.

Timing of Patent Applications

Legally, a U.S. patent application must be filed within one year of the first public disclo-
sure of an invention. In much of the rest of the world, a patent must be filed before any
public disclosure or within one year of filing a U.S. application, so long as the U.S. appli-
cation is filed before public disclosure. In most cases, public disclosure is a description of
the invention to an individual or group of people who are not obligated to keep the inven-
tion confidential. Examples of such disclosure include: publication of invention details in
a magazine or journal, presentation of a product at a trade show, display of the invention
on a publicly accessible Web site, or test marketing of a product. (Most experts agree that
a student’s class presentation of an invention is not public disclosure, as long as the class
members have agreed to preserve the confidentiality of the invention and as long as mem-
bers of the general public are not present.) We strongly recommend that inventors file pat-
ent applications before any public disclosure. This action ensures that the option to file an
international patent is preserved for one year. Fortunately, a provisional patent application
may be filed at relatively little expense to preserve these rights.

Although we recommend that filing precede public disclosure, the inventor usually
benefits by delaying the application until just before such disclosure. The principal
advantage to waiting as long as possible is that the inventor has as much knowledge as
possible about the invention and its commercialization. Very often what the inventor be-
lieves are the key features of an invention early in the innovation process turn out to be
less important than refinements developed later in the innovation process. By waiting,
the inventor can ensure that the most important elements of the invention are captured in
the patent application.Patents and Intellectual Property 337

The US. patent system grants priority among competing patent applications based on
the date of invention, whereas the patent systems in much of the rest of the world grant
priority based on the date of the patent application. Therefore, in the United States, inventors
should carefully document the date of their inventions. This is best done by describing an
invention in a bound notebook and then having a witness sign and date each page.

Type of Application

A team faces two basic choices about the type of patent application to be pursued. First, the
team must decide whether to file a regular patent application or a provisional patent appli-
cation. Second, the team must decide whether to pursue domestic and/or foreign patents.

A regular patent application was the only option available to an inventor in the United
States until substantial changes were made to patent law in 1995. Under current US. patent
law, an inventor may file a provisional patent application. A provisional patent application
needs only to fully describe the invention. It does not need to contain claims or comply with
the formal structure and language of a regular patent application. The principal advantage of
a provisional patent application is that it requires less cost and effort to prepare and file than
a regular patent application, but it preserves all options to pursue further patent filings for
a period of one year. Once a provisional patent application has been filed, a company may
label its products “patent pending,” and it retains the right to file a foreign patent applica-
tion and/or a regular patent application. The only fundamental disadvantage of a provisional
patent application is that it delays the eventual issuance of a patent by up to one year, as the
process of examining a patent application does not begin until a regular patent application
is filed. Another possible disadvantage is that the preliminary nature of a provisional pat-
ent application may lead to the use of less care in preparing the description of the invention
than might be the case with a regular application. The description of the invention must be
complete in a provisional patent application, and the regular patent application that follows
cannot contain features that were not described in the provisional application.

Filing patents internationally is expensive and somewhat complex. The team should
therefore consult with a patent professional about international patent strategy, as patent
law varies somewhat from country to country. To obtain foreign patent rights, an applica-
tion must eventually be filed in each country in which a patent is sought. (The European
Community, however, acts as a single entity with respect to patent filing.) Foreign ap-
plications can be expensive, costing up to $15,000 per country for filing fees, translation
fees, and patent agent fees.

The expense of filing for foreign patents can be delayed, generally by 30 months,
by filing a Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) application. A PCT application is filed in
one country (e.g., the United States) but is designated as a PCT application, which is
the beginning of a process by which foreign patents can be pursued. A PCT application
costs only slightly more than a regular patent application in filing fees, but it allows for
a substantial delay before application fees must be paid in the countries in which foreign
patents are sought.

The provisional patent application and the PCT application together provide a vehicle
for a small company or individual inventor to preserve most patent rights with relatively
little cost. A typical strategy is to file a provisional patent application before any public
disclosure of the invention; then, within one year, to file a PCT application with the US.
patent office; then, when forced to act or abandon the application at some point in the338 Chapter 16

future (usually a year or more away), to pursue actual foreign applications. This strategy
allows a delay of two or more years before substantial legal and application fees must be
paid. During this period, the team can assess the true commercial potential of the products
embodying the invention and can estimate the value of more extensive patent protection.

Scope of Application

The team should evaluate the overall product design and decide which elements embody
inventions that are likely to be patentable. Typically the process of reviewing the product
design will result in a list of elements that the team considers to be novel and nonobvious.
The team should focus on those elements that present substantial barriers to competition,
which are typically the elements that in the opinion of the team represent a substantial im-
provement over the publicly known methods of addressing similar problems.

Complex products often embody several inventions. For example, a printer may em-
body novel signal processing methods and novel paper handling techniques. Sometimes
these inventions fall into very different classes within the patent system. As a result, a
product development team may need to file multiple applications corresponding to the
distinct classes of invention. For simple products or for products that embody a single
type of invention, a single patent application usually suffices. The decision about whether
to divide an application into multiple parts is complex and is best made in consultation
with a patent attorney. However, all intellectual property rights are preserved even if a
patent application is filed that contains multiple classes of inventions. In such cases, the
patent office will inform the inventor that the application must be divided.

While defining the scope of the patent, the team should also consider who the inven-
tors are. An inventor is a person who contributed substantially to the creation of the
invention. The definition of an inventor for the purposes of patent law is subjective. For
example, a technician who only ran experiments would not typically be an inventor, but a
technician who ran experiments and then devised a solution to an observed problem with
the device could be considered an inventor. There is no limit to the number of inventors
named in a patent application. We believe that product development and invention are
most often team efforts and that many members of the team who participated in concept
generation and the subsequent design activities could be considered inventors. Failing to
name a person who is an inventor can result in a patent being declared not valid.

Step 2: Study Prior Inventions

There are three key reasons for studying prior inventions, the so-called prior art. First,
by studying the prior patent literature, design teams can learn whether an invention may
infringe on existing unexpired patents. Although there is no legal barrier to patenting an
invention that infringes on an existing patent, if anyone manufactures, sells, or uses a
product that infringes upon an existing patent without a license, the patent owner may sue
for damages. Second, by studying the prior art, the inventors get a sense of how similar
their invention is to prior inventions and therefore how likely they are to be granted a
broad patent. Third, the team will develop background knowledge enabling the members
to craft novel claims.

In the course of product development efforts, most teams accumulate a variety of refer-
ences to prior inventions. Some of the sources of information on prior inventions include:Patents and Intellectual Property 339

0 Existing and historical product literature.
0 Patent searches.
0 Technical and trade publications.

Several good online reference sources can be used for searching patents. Simple keyword
searches are often sufficient to find most relevant patents. It is important for the team to
keep a file containing the prior art they are aware of. This information must be provided
to the patent office shortly after filing the patent application.

In the Coffin patent for the cup holder shown in Exhibit 16-1, references to 19 other
US. patents are cited along with a reference to a book. (The references cited by the inven-
tor and by the patent examiner are listed on the first page of a patent. The first page of the
Coffin patent is reproduced as Exhibit 16-3.) Among the prior art for the Coffin patent, for
example, is a 1930 patent by Benson (1,771,765; “Waterproof Paper Receptacle”) in which
a corrugated holder insulates a paper liner cup. The Benson patent describes a cup holder
that fits underneath and into the bottom of the liner cup. This is one reason that the inven-
tion in the Coffin patent is described as a tube with an opening at the top and bottom.

Step 3: Outline Claims

Issuance of a patent gives the owner a legal right to exclude others from infringing on
the invention specifically described in the patent’s claims. Claims describe certain char-
acteristics of the invention; they are written in formal legal language and must adhere to
some rules of composition. In step 5 we describe how the formal legal language works.
However, at this point in the process of preparing the disclosure, the team benefits from
thinking carefully about what it believes is unique about the invention. We therefore rec-
ommend that the team outline the claims. Don’t worry about legal precision at this point.
Instead, make a list of the features and characteristics of the invention that the team be-
lieves are unique and valuable. For example, an outline of the claims for the Coffin inven-
tion might be:

° Use of corrugations as insulation, in many possible forms
° Corrugations on the inside surface of the tube
° Corrugations on the outside surface of the tube
° Corrugations sandwiched between two ﬂat layers of sheet material
° Vertical orientation of ﬂutes
° Flutes open at top and bottom of holder
° Corrugations with “triangle wave” cross section
° Corrugations with “sine wave” cross section
0 Tubular form with openings at both ends
0 In shape of truncated cone
° Recyclable materials
0 Recyclable adhesive
° Recyclable sheeting
° Cellulose material340 Chapter 16

° Biodegradable adhesive
° Surface to print on
0 Holder folds ﬂat along two fold lines

The outline of the claims provides guidance about what must be described in detail in the
description.

Step 4: Write the Description of the Invention

The bulk of a patent application is formally known as the Specification. To avoid confu-
sion with our use of the word Specifications in this book, we call the body of the patent
application the description because this is the part of the application that actually de-
scribes the invention. The description must present the invention in enough detail that
someone with “ordinary skill in the art” (i.e., someone with the skills and capabilities of
a typical practitioner working in the same basic field as the invention) could implement
the invention. The description should also be a marketing document promoting the value
of the invention and the weaknesses in existing solutions. The patent application will be
read by a patent examiner, who will search and study prior patents. The description must
convince the examiner that the inventors developed something useful that is different
from existing inventions and that is nonobvious. In these respects one can think of the
description as essentially a technical report on the invention. There are some formatting
conventions for patent applications, although these are not strictly necessary for an inven-
tion disclosure or a provisional patent application.

Patent law requires that the application “teach” with sufficient detail that someone
“skilled in the art” could practice the invention. For example, in the Coffin patent, the
inventor discloses that the adhesive to bond the ﬂutes is “a recyclable, and preferably a
biodegradable adhesive, for example, R130 adhesive by Fasson Inc., Grand Rapids, MI.”
The requirement to completely teach the invention may be somewhat counterintuitive
for someone accustomed to treating inventions confidentially. Patent law requires that
inventors disclose what they know about the invention, but in exchange they are granted
the right to exclude others from practicing the invention for a limited time period. This
requirement reﬂects the basic tension in the patent system between granting a temporary
monopoly to inventors in exchange for publication of information that will eventually be
available for use by anyone.

A typical description includes the following elements:

° Title: Provide a short descriptive label for the invention, for example, “Recyclable
Corrugated Beverage Container and Holder.”

° List of inventors: All inventors must be listed. A person should be listed as an inventor
if he or she originated any of the inventions claimed in the application. There are no
legal limits to the number of inventors and no requirements about the order in which
inventors are listed. A failure to list an inventor could result in a patent eventually
being declared not valid.

° Field of the invention: Explain what type of device, product, machine, or method this
invention relates to. For example, the Coffin patent reads, “This invention relates to in-
sulating containers, and especially to those which are recyclable and made of cellulosic
materials.”Patents and Intellectual Property 341

° Background of the invention: State the problem that the invention solves. Explain the
context for the problem, what is wrong with existing solutions, why a new solution is
needed, and what advantages are offered by the invention.

° Summary of the invention: This section should present the substance of the invention
in summarized form. The summary may point out the advantages of the invention and
how it solves the problems described in the background.

° Brief description of the drawings: List the figures in the description along with a brief
description of each drawing. For example, “Figure 10 is a perspective view of a pre-
ferred embodiment illustrating internal ﬂute portions in breakaway views.”

° Detailed description of the invention: This section of the description is usually the
most comprehensive and contains detailed descriptions of embodiments of the inven-
tion along with an explanation of how these embodiments work. Further discussion of
the detailed description is provided below.

Figures

Formal figures for patents must comply with a variety of rules about labeling, line weight,
and types of graphical elements. However, for an invention disclosure or provisional pat-
ent application, informal figures are sufficient and hand sketches or CAD drawings are
perfectly appropriate. At some point after filing a regular patent application, the patent
office will request formal figures, at which time a professional drafter may be hired to pre-
pare formal versions of the necessary figures. Prepare enough figures to clearly show the
key elements of the invention in the preferred embodiments that have been considered. A
simple invention like the cup holder would probably require 5 to 15 figures.

The features shown in the figures may be labeled with words (e.g., “outer layer”),
although to facilitate preparation of a regular patent application, the team may wish to
use “reference numerals” on the figures right from the beginning. No rule stipulates
that reference numerals must be uninterrupted and consecutive, so a convenient num-
bering scheme uses reference numerals 10, 11, 12, and so on, for features that first
appear in Figure 1; reference numerals 20, 21, 22, and so on, for features that first ap-
pear in Figure 2; and so on. This way adding numerals to one figure does not inﬂuence
the use of numerals in another figure. The same feature shown in more than one figure
must be labeled with the same reference numeral, so some numerals will be carried
over from one figure to another.

Writing the Detailed Description

The detailed description describes embodiments of the invention. An embodiment is a
physical realization of the claimed invention. Patent law requires that the application de-
scribe the preferred embodiment—that is, the best way of practicing the invention. Typi-
cally, a detailed description is organized as a collection of paragraphs, each describing an
embodiment of the invention in terms of its physical structure along with an explanation
of how that embodiment works.

A good strategy for writing the detailed description is to first create the figures that show
embodiments of the invention. Next describe the embodiment by labeling each feature of
the embodiment in the figure and explaining the arrangement of these features. Finally, ex-
plain how the embodiment works and why the features are important to this function. This
process is repeated for each of the embodiments described in the detailed description.342 Chapter 16

EXHIBIT 1 6-4
Figure 10

from the Coffin
patent.

 

FIG. 10

Consider Figure 10 from the Coffin patent, shown here as Exhibit 16-4. A detailed de-
scription might include language like the following:

A preferred embodiment of the invention is shown in Figure 10. A liner surface 22 and an
outer surface 24 sandwich a corrugation 21. The assembly 200 forms a tubular shape whose
diameter changes linearly with length so as to form a section of a truncated cone. The smooth
outer surface 24 provides a smooth surface onto which graphics may be printed. Corrugation
21 is bonded to outer surface 24 and liner surface 22 with a recyclable adhesive.

The detailed description should show alternative embodiments of the invention. For ex-
ample, in the Coffin patent, the invention features “ﬂutes” that create an insulating air
gap. In a preferred embodiment these ﬂutes are formed by smooth wavy corrugations,
with the smooth surface on the outside to allow for graphics to be easily printed on the
sleeve. Alternative embodiments include triangle waves and/or sheet materials on either
or both sides of the tube. These alternative embodiments are described in the detailed de-
scription and shown in the figures. (See Exhibit 16-5.)

Defensive Disclosure

The primary benefit of a patent is that it grants the owner Offensive rights. That is, the owner
has the right to prevent others from practicing the invention. However, patents also offer a
subtle mechanism for taking defensive actions. A patent is considered prior art and so an
invention that appears in a patent may not be patented in the future. For this reason, inventorsEXHIBIT 1 6-5
Figures 6a, 6b,
7a, and 7b

from the Coffin
patent showing
alternative
embodiments of
the invention.

Patents and Intellectual Property 343

11 24 21
12 22
Fig. 6a Fig. 6b

31 44 41
32 42
Fig. 7a Fig. 7b

may benefit from disclosing essentially every invention they considered that relates to the
claimed invention no matter how wide ranging. This may be done in the detailed description.
Even though these inventions may not actually be reﬂected in the claims of the patent, their
disclosure becomes part of the prior art and therefore prevents others from patenting them.
This defensive strategy may offer competitive advantages in fields of emerging technologies.

Step 5: Refine Claims

The claims are a set of numbered phrases that precisely define the essential elements of
the invention. The claims are the basis for all offensive patent rights. A patent owner can
prevent others from practicing the invention described by the claims only. The rest of the
patent application is essentially background and context for the claims.

Writing the Claims

Although claims must be expressed verbally, they adhere to a strict mathematical logic.
Almost all claims are formulated as a recursive expression of the form

X=A+B+C..., whereA=u+v+w..., 3:...

This is expressed verbally as:

AnX comprising an A, a B, and a C, wherein said A is comprised of a u, a v, and a w and
wherein said B is . . .

Note that claims comply with some verbal conventions. The word comprising means “in-
cluding but not limited to” and is almost always used as the equal sign in the expression.
The first time an element, say a liner sheet, is named in a claim the inventor uses the indefi-
nite article a as in “comprises a liner sheet.” Once this element has been named it is never
referred to as the liner sheet, but always as said liner sheet. This is true for every subse-
quent instance in which liner sheet is used in the claims. Although these conventions are344 Chapter 16

not difficult to remember once learned, inventors preparing a disclosure for subsequent
editing by a patent attorney should not worry too much about formal correctness of the lan-
guage. The language is easily corrected when the formal patent application is prepared.

Multiple claims are arranged hierarchically into independent claims and dependent
claims. Independent claims stand alone and form the root nodes of a hierarchy of claims.
Dependent claims always add further restrictions to an independent claim. Dependent
claims are typically written in this form:

The invention of Claim N, ﬁlrther comprising Q, R, and S . . .
or
The invention of Claim N, wherein said A . . .

Dependent claims essentially inherit all of the properties of the independent claim on
which they depend. In fact, a dependent claim can be read as if all of the language of the
independent claim on which it depends were inserted as a replacement for the introduc-
tory phrase “The invention of Claim N.”

The dependent claims are important in that the patent office may reject the indepen-
dent claim as obvious or not novel while allowing one or more dependent claims. In such
cases, patentable material remains; the original independent claim can be deleted and the
original dependent claim can be rewritten as an independent claim.

The elements of a claim form a logical and relationship. To infringe on a claim, a
device must include each and every element named in the claim. If, for example, a com-
petitive product were to use only three of four elements named in a claim, it would not
infringe on the claim.

Consider this example from the Coffin patent (edited slightly for clarity).

Claim 1

A beverage container holder, comprising a corrugated tubular member comprising cellulosic
material and at least a first opening therein for receiving and retaining a beverage container,
said corrugated tubular member comprising ﬂuting means for containing insulating air; said
ﬂuting means comprising ﬂuting adhesively attached to a liner with a recyclable adhesive.

Claim 1 is an independent claim. Consider Claim 2, which is dependent on Claim 1.

Claim 2

The holder of claim 1, wherein said tubular member further comprises a second opening
wherein said first opening and said second opening are of unequal cross-sectional dimensions.

This claim adheres to the logical structure shown in Exhibit 16-6.
Let us reinforce the idea that a claim is formed of a logical “and” relation among its
elements. Claim 1 is for a holder that includes all of these elements:

° Corrugated tube
° Made of cellulosic material
0 With a first opening
0 With ﬂuting means
° Made of ﬂutes adhesively attached to a liner
° Using recyclable adhesiveEXHIBIT 16-6

The logical
structure of
Claims 1 and 2
from the Coffin
patent. Note
that Claim 2

is dependent
on Claim 1

and simply
adds further
restrictions,

a second
opening and

a relationship
between the
first and second
openings.

Patents and Intellectual Property 345

 

 

Claim 1

 

 

 

 

cellulosic material fluting means

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

liner

 

 

 

flutes l

 

   
   

|.__________

recyclable adhesive

 

If a competing cup holder does not have every one of these elements, it does not infringe
upon this claim. So, for example, if it were made of polystyrene, it would not infringe on this
claim (no cellulosic material). Consider a patent by Jay Sorensen filed shortly after the Cof-
fin patent. Sorensen’s patent is for a cup holder with a dimpled surface. (See Exhibit 16-7.)
Because this invention does not have “ﬂuting means” it does not infringe upon the Coffin
patent. Sorensen’s claims include the following (edited slightly for clarity):

Claim 4

A cup holder comprising a band of material formed with an open top and an open bottom
through which a cup can extend and an inner surface immediately adjacent to said cup, said
band comprising a plurality of discrete, spaced-apart, approximately semi-spherically shaped
depressions distributed on substantially the entire inner surface of said band so that each
depression defines a non-contacting region of said band creating an air gap between said
band and said cup, thereby reducing the rate of heat transfer through said holder.

At least two lessons can be derived from comparing the Coffin and Sorensen inven-
tions. First, patents often provide relatively limited commercial advantages. In this case,
by creating a cup holder with dimples instead of ﬂutes, Sorensen was able to avoid in-
fringing on the Coffin patent. In fact, both inventions are embodied by successful com-
mercial products, but neither patent provides ironclad protection from competition. The
second lesson is that the inventor should invest in considering as many ways as possible
to achieve the desired function of the invention, in this case an insulating layer. Had Cof-
fin thought of a dimpled surface, then this feature could have been described in his patent
application. In the best case, the dimpled invention may have formed the basis for addi-
tional claims in the patent. In the worst case, the description of the dimpled embodiment
in the patent application would have been prior art and therefore prevented Sorensen
from obtaining his patent. (It would not prevent Sorensen and others from practicing the
dimpled invention unless it were claimed.)346 Chapter 16

 

EXHIBIT 1 6-7 Figure from the Sorensen patent (US. Patent 5,425,497, “dimpled cup holder”).

Guidelines for Crafting Claims

Several guidelines are helpful in crafting claims. Writing great claims is tricky, so we advise
inventors to seek the help of an experienced patent attorney in refining a patent application.

0 Always try to make a claim as general as possible. When a specific descriptor is used,
try making it general. For example, Coffin’s patent speaks of a “tubular member” and
not a “tube.”

99 (6

° Avoid absolute definitions by using modifiers like “substantially, essentially,” and
“approximately.”

0 Attempt to create an invention that does not infringe on the draft claim, and then try to
rewrite the claim or add an additional claim such that the hypothetical invention would
infringe.

Step 6: Pursue Application

In most cases, the inventor will deliver the draft application to a patent attorney or other
intellectual property professional for refinement and formal application. It is possible
to file a patent application as an individual if severely budget constrained. Pressman
provides detailed guidelines for doing this (Pressman, 2008). Note that the statutory re-
quirements are administratively complex, and so we highly recommend that commercialPatents and Intellectual Property 347

product development teams retain a competent specialist to pursue any application to the
patent office.

Once an invention disclosure is prepared, the team can proceed in four different ways,
with the specific course of action dictated by the business context.

° The team can ﬁle a provisional patent application. An individual or small company
can file a provisional patent application for less than $100 in filing fees. The applica-
tion need contain only a description of the invention and need not comply with the
formalities of a regular patent application. Once a provisional application is filed, a
product may be labeled “patent pending.” If the team wishes to pursue a regular patent
application, this application must be filed within one year of the filing of the provi-
sional patent application. A provisional patent therefore acts as an option to pursue a
regular patent application and allows the team time to pursue licensing or further in-
vestigation before incurring the expense of a regular patent application.

° The team may file a regular patent application in the United States. This process
costs about $500 in filing fees for a small company or individual, in addition to the
legal fees for a patent attorney.

° The team may file a patent cooperation treaty or PCT application. A PCT application
allows a single patent application in a single country, say the United States, to initiate the
process of pursuing international patent protection. Eventually, the inventor must pur-
sue patent protection in individual countries or collections of countries (e.g., European
Union). However, the PCT process allows the first steps of the process to be carried out
relatively efficiently and with a single point of contact. The entire process of pursuing for-
eign patent rights is beyond the scope of this chapter. Consult a patent attorney for details.

° The team can defer application indefinitely. The team may delay in hope that future
information will make a course of action obvious. In some cases, the team may decide
not to pursue the invention and therefore may decide to abandon the patent application
process. The consequences of delay may be substantial. If the invention is disclosed
publicly, then all international patent rights are forgone. If a year passes after public
disclosure without filing a regular patent application, then U.S. patent rights are also
forgone. Nevertheless, the team may be able to defer any action for several months be-
fore these eventualities are realized.

At some point after the team files a regular patent application or a PTO application,
the patent office will issue an oﬂice action responding to the application. In almost all
cases, a patent examiner will reject many or all of the claims as either obvious or not
novel. This is the norm and it is part of a back-and-forth exchange between the patent
office and inventor that should eventually result in claims that are patentable. Next, the
inventor and patent attorney sharpen arguments, edit claims to reﬂect comments from
the examiner, and respond to the office action with an amended application. Most appli-
cations eventually result in an issued patent, although the claims rarely remain exactly as
originally written.

The patent office does not review or act on provisional patent applications. It merely

records their filing and stores the application for review when and if a regular application
is filed.348 Chapter 16

Step 7: Reflect on the Results and the Process

In reﬂecting on the patent application or invention disclosure, the team should consider at
least the following questions:

What are the essential and distinctive features of the product concept, and therefore
the invention? Are these features reﬂected in the description of the invention and in the
claims? Does the description communicate the best way of practicing the invention?

What is the timing of future required actions? The team’s patent attorney will typi-
cally maintain a docket—essentially a calendar indicating when further actions must
be taken to preserve patent rights. However, the inventor or someone within the team’s
company should also be responsible for thinking about the actions that must be taken
in the coming months.

Which aspects of the process of preparing the patent application or invention disclo-
sure went smoothly and which aspects require further efforts in the future?

What did the team learn about the prior art that may inform future product develop-
ment efforts? For example, are there valuable technologies that might be licensed from
existing patent holders? Are competitors’ patents expiring, possibly allowing the team
to use a convenient solution to a long-standing problem?

How strong an intellectual property position does the team have? Are the features of
the invention in the patent application so novel and valuable that they really prevent
competitors from direct competition, or is the patent likely to be merely a deterrent to
the most direct copies of the products that embody the invention?

Did the team begin the process too early or too late? Was the effort rushed? What is
the ideal timing for the next effort to prepare a patent application?

 

Summary

A patent is a temporary monopoly granted by a government to exclude others from
using, making, or selling an invention. Patent law is intended to balance an incentive
for invention with the free dissemination of information.

Utility patents are the central element of the intellectual property for most technology-
based product development efforts.

An invention can be patented if it is useful, novel, and nonobvious.

The final invention that is patented is defined by the patent claims. The rest of the patent
application essentially serves as background and explanation in support of the claims.

We recommend a seven-step process for pursuing a patent:
1. Formulate a strategy and plan.

2. Study prior inventions.

3. Outline claims.

4. Write the description of the invention.

5. Refine claims.Patents and Intellectual Property 349

6. Pursue application.
7. Reﬂect on the results and the process.

0 Provisional patent applications and patent cooperation treaty (PCT) applications can
be used to minimize the costs of pursuing patent protection while preserving all future
options.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the lntemet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

The examples in the chapter are derived from the Coffin and Sorensen patents.
Coffin, David W., Recyclable Corrugated Beverage Container and Holder, United
States Patent 5,205,473, April 27, 1993.

Sorensen, Jay, Cup Holder, United States Patent 5,425,497, June 20, 1995.

Pressman’s book is a comprehensive guide to the details of patent law and provides a

step-by-step process for writing a patent application and pursuing the application with the

patent office. The book also contains valuable related information on licensing inventions.
Pressman, David, Patent It Yourself, thirteenth edition, Nolo Press, Berkeley, CA, 2008.

Stim provides an in-depth discussion of most aspects of intellectual property, including
trademarks and copyrights.
Stim, Richard, Patent, Copyright & Trademark: An Intellectual Property Desk
Reference, eleventh edition, Nolo Press, Berkeley, CA, 2010.

Exercises

1. Find a patent number on a product that interests you. Look up the patent using an
online reference tool.

2. Draft a claim for the self-stick notepad invention marketed by 3M Corporation as the
Post-it note.

3. Draw a logic diagram of two claims for the patent in Exercise 1.

4. Generate one or more product concepts that are very different from the Coffin and
Sorensen inventions to address the problem of handling a hot coffee cup and that don’t
infringe the Coffin and Sorensen patents.

Thought Questions

1. Controversy erupted in 1999 when the J.M. Smucker Company sued a Michigan bak-
ery, Albie’s, for infringing on its patent by marketing a crustless peanut butter and jelly
sandwich crimped on the edges. (See US. patent 6,004,596.) Albie’s argued that the
patent was issued in error because the invention was obvious. Look up the Smucker pat-
ent. Do you believe that the Smucker’s invention is nonobvious? Why or why not?

2. Why might an inventor describe but not claim an invention in a patent?350 Chapter 16

Appendix A

 

Trademarks

A trademark is a word or symbol associated with the products of a particular manufac-
turer. Trademarks can form an important element of the portfolio of intellectual property
owned by a company. Trademarks can be words, “word marks” (stylized graphics spelling
out words), and/or symbols. Trademarks usually correspond to brands, product names,
and sometimes to company names.

Trademark law is intended to prevent unfair competition, which could result if one
manufacturer named its products like those of another in an attempt to confuse the pub-
lic. In fact, to avoid confusion, when a manufacturer uses a competitor’s trademark in
advertising, say for the purposes of comparison, it must by law indicate that the name is a
trademark of the competitor.

Trademarks must not be purely descriptive. For example, although a company could
not obtain a trademark on “Insulating Sleeve,” it could for names that are suggestive but
not purely descriptive such as “Insleev,” “ThermaJo,” or “CupPup.”

In the United States, a federal trademark may be established merely by using the mark
in interstate commerce. This is done by attaching “TM” to the word or symbol when
used in advertising or labeling the product (e.g., JavaJacketTM). Trademarks may also be
registered at modest cost through the United States Patent and Trademark Office using a
simple process. When registered, a trademark is denoted with the symbol ® (e.g., Coke®).

Given the importance of the Internet for communicating with customers, when creat-
ing new product names, the team should strive to create trademarks that correspond ex-
actly to domain names on the Internet.

Appendix B

 

Advice to Individual Inventors

Most students of product development and product development professionals have at
some point had an idea for a novel product. Often further thought results in a product con-
cept, which sometimes embodies a patentable invention. A common misconception among
inventors is that a raw idea or even a product concept is highly valuable. Here is some ad-
vice based on observations of many inventors and product commercialization efforts.

° A patent can be a useful element of a plan for developing and commercializing a prod-
uct. However, it is not really a central element of that activity. Patenting an invention
can usually wait until many of the technical and market risks have been addressed.

0 A patent by itself rarely has any commercial value. (An idea by itself has even less
value.) To extract value from a product opportunity, an inventor must typically com-
plete a product design, resolving the difficult trade-offs associated with addressing
customer needs while minimizing production costs. Once this hard work is completed,
a product design may have substantial value. In most cases, pursuing a patent is notPatents and Intellectual Property 351

worth the effort except as part of a larger effort to take a product concept through to a
substantial development milestone such as a working prototype. If the design is proven
through prototyping and testing, a patent can be an important mechanism for increas-
ing the value of this intellectual property.

Licensing a patent to a manufacturer as an individual inventor is very difficult. If you
are serious about your product opportunity, be prepared to pursue commercialization
of your product on your own or in partnership with a smaller company. Once you have
demonstrated a market for the product, licensing to a larger entity becomes much more
likely.

File a provisional patent application. For very little money, an individual using the
guidelines in this chapter can file a provisional application. This action provides patent
protection for a year, while you evaluate whether your idea is worth pursuing.CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

Product Development
Economics

45? Polaroid

 

Photo courtesy of Arne List

EXHIBIT 17-1

One of Polaroid’s digital color photo printers.

353354 Chapter 17

A product development team at Polaroid Corporation was in the midst of developing a
new photograph printer, the CI-700. Exhibit 17-1 shows one of Polaroid’s color photo
printers. The CI-700 would produce instant full-color photographs from digital images
stored in a computer. The primary markets for the product are the graphic arts, insurance,
and real estate industries. During the CI-700’s development, the Polaroid product develop-
ment team was faced with several decisions that it knew could have a significant impact
on the product’s profitability:

° Should the team take more time for development in order to make the product avail-
able on multiple computer “platforms,” or would a delay in bringing the CI-700 to
market be too costly?

° Should the product use standard print media from Polaroid’s existing businesses or
new and specialized premium-quality print media?

° Should the team increase development spending in order to increase the reliability of
the CI-700?

The product development team needed tools to help it make these and other develop-
ment decisions. This chapter presents an economic analysis method for supporting the
decisions of product development teams. The process consists of two types of analysis,
quantitative and qualitative. The emphasis in this chapter is on quick, approximate meth-
ods for supporting decision making within the project team.

Elements of Economic Analysis

Quantitative Analysis

There are several basic cash inﬂows (revenues) and cash outﬂows (costs) in the life cycle
of a successful new product. Cash inﬂows come from product sales. Cash outﬂows in-
clude spending on product and process development; costs of production ramp-up such
as equipment purchases and tooling; costs of marketing and supporting the product; and
ongoing production costs such as raw materials, components, and labor. The cumulative
cash inﬂows and outﬂows over the life cycle of a typical successful product are presented
schematically in Exhibit 17-2.

Economically successful products are profitable; that is, they generate more cumula-
tive inﬂows than cumulative outﬂows. A measure of the degree to which inﬂows are
greater than outﬂows is the net present value (NPV) of the project, or the value in today’s
dollars of all of the expected future cash ﬂows. The quantitative part of the economic
analysis method described in this chapter estimates the NPV of a project’s expected cash
ﬂows. The method uses NPV techniques because they are easily understood and used
widely in business. (Appendix A provides a brief tutorial on NPV.) The value of quantita-
tive analysis is not only in providing objective evaluations of projects and alternatives but
also in bringing a measure of structure and discipline to the assessment of product devel-
opment projects.

Qualitative Analysis

Quantitative analysis can capture only those factors that are measurable, yet projects often
have both positive and negative implications that are difficult to quantify. Also,Cumulative
Inflow or
Outflow ($)

—$

Product Development Economics 355

Sales Revenues

Time

 

>

Development Cost
Ramp-up Costs

Marketing and
Support Costs

Production Cost

 

V

EXHIBIT 1 7-2 Typical cash ﬂows for a successful new product.

quantitative analysis rarely captures the characteristics of a dynamic and competitive en-
vironment. The chief executive of a major American corporation underscores this point:
“I’ve had MBAs argue with me that a capital expenditure is wrong because it doesn’t have
a payback within two or three years; they ignore the fact that if we don’t make the move,
we’ll fall behind the rest of our industry in four or five years” (Linder and Smith, 1992).
The method in this chapter uses qualitative analysis to capture some of these issues. Our
approach to qualitative analysis is to consider specifically the interactions between the
project and (l) the firm, (2) the market, and (3) the macroeconomic environment.

When Should Economic Analysis Be Performed?

Economic analysis, which includes both quantitative and qualitative approaches, is useful
in at least two different circumstances:

° Go/no-go milestones: For example, should we try to develop a product to address
this market opportunity? Should we proceed with the implementation of a selected
concept? Should we launch the product we have developed? These decisions typically
arise at the end of each phase of development.356 Chapter 17

° Operational design and development decisions: Operational decisions involve ques-
tions such as: Should we spend $100,000 to hire an outside firm to develop this compo-
nent in order to save two months of development time? Should we launch the product in

four months at a unit cost of $450 or wait until six months when we can reduce the cost
to $400?

The analysis done at the beginning of a project can usually be updated with current
information so that it does not have to be created in its entirety each time. Used in this
way, the analysis becomes one of the information systems the team uses to manage the
development project.

Economic analysis can be carried out by any member of the development team. In
small companies, the project leader or one of the members of the core project team will
implement the details of the analysis. In larger companies, a representative from a finance
or planning group may be appointed to assist the development team in performing the
analysis. We emphasize that even when someone with formal training in financial mod-
eling takes responsibility for this analysis, the entire team should fully understand the
analysis and be involved in its formulation and use.

Economic Analysis Process

We recommend the following four-step method for the economic analysis of a product
development project:

1. Build a base-case financial model.

2. Perform a sensitivity analysis to understand the relationships between financial success
and the key assumptions and variables of the model.

3. Use the sensitivity analysis to understand project trade-offs.
4. Consider the inﬂuence of the qualitative factors on project success.

The balance of this chapter is organized around these four steps.

Step 1: Build a Base-Case Financial Model

Constructing the base-case model consists of estimating the timing and magnitude of fu-
ture cash ﬂows and then computing the NPV of those cash ﬂows.

Estimate the Timing and Magnitude
of Future Cash Inflows and Outflows

The timing and magnitude of the cash ﬂows is estimated by merging the project sched-
ule with the project budget, sales volume forecasts, and estimated production costs. The
level of detail of cash ﬂows should be coarse enough to be convenient to work with, yet it
should contain enough resolution to facilitate effective decision making. The most basic
categories of cash ﬂow for a typical new product development project are:

0 Development cost (all remaining design, testing, and refinement costs up to production
ramp-up).

° Ramp-up cost.

0 Marketing and support cost.EXHIBIT 1 7-3
CI-700 project
budgets, sales
volume forecasts,
and production
costs.

357

Product Development Economics

0 Production cost.
° Sales revenues.

Depending on the types of decisions the model will support, greater levels of detail for
one or more areas may be required. More detailed modeling may consider these same five
cash ﬂows in greater detail, or it may consider other ﬂows. Typical refinements include:

0 Breakdown of production costs into direct costs and indirect costs (i.e., overhead).

0 Breakdown of marketing and support costs into launch costs, promotion costs, direct
sales costs, and service costs.

0 Inclusion of tax effects, including depreciation and investment tax credits. (Tax effects
are typically considered in even simple financial modeling. For the sake of clarity,
however, we omit the tax effects in our examples.)

° Inclusion of such miscellaneous inﬂows and outﬂows as working capital requirements,
cannibalization (the impact of the new product on existing product sales), salvage
costs, and opportunity costs.

The financial model we use in this chapter is simplified to include only the major cash
ﬂows that are typically considered in practice, but conceptually it is identical to more
complex models. The numerical values of the cash ﬂows come from budgets and other
estimates obtained from the development team, the manufacturing organization, and the
marketing organization. Exhibit 17-3 shows the relevant financial estimates for the
CI-700. (These data have been disguised to protect Polaroid’s proprietary financial
information.) For a more detailed discussion of manufacturing costs, see Chapter 13, Design
for Manufacturing. Note that all revenues and expenses to date are sunk costs and are
irrelevant to NPV calculations. (The concept of sunk costs is reviewed in Appendix A.)

In order to complete the model, the financial estimates must be merged with tim-
ing information. This can be done by considering the project schedule and sales plan.
Exhibit 17-4 shows the project timing information in Gantt chart form for the CI-700.
(For most projects, a time increment of months or quarters is most appropriate.) The re-
maining time to market is estimated to be five quarters, and product sales are anticipated
to last 11 quarters.

A common method of representing project cash ﬂow is a table. The rows of the table
are the different cash ﬂow categories, while the columns represent successive time peri-
ods. Usually this table is encoded in a computer spreadsheet to facilitate analysis. For
this example, we assume that the rate of cash ﬂow for any category is constant across
any time period (e.g., total development spending of $5 million over one year is allocated
equally to each of the four quarters); however, the values can be arranged in any way that
best represents the team’s forecast of the cash ﬂows. We multiply the unit sales quantity

 

1. Development cost $5 million

2. Ramp—up cost $2 million

3. Marketing and support cost $1 million/year
4. Unit production cost $400/unit

5. Sales and production volume 20,000 units/year
6. Unit price $800/unit358 Chapter 17

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Year 1 Year 2, Year 3 Year 4
01 02 O3 O4 01 02 03 Q4 01 C12 03 O4 01 02 O3 04
Development
Ramp-up
Marketing and support
Production and sales window
EXHIBIT 1 7-4 CI-700 project schedule from inception through market withdrawal.
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
(‘5 values in thousands) 0.1 02 O3 04 Q1 02 03 Q4 01 02 Q3 Q4 01 02 03 04
Development cost —1,250 —‘l,250 —1,250 4,250
Rampvup cost —1,000 —1,000
Marketing & support cost ~250 ~250 ~250 ~250 ~250 ~250 ~250 ~250 ~250 ~250 ~250 ~250
Production cost -2,000 —2,000 -2,000 —2,000 .—2,000 -2,000 -2,000 -2,000 -2,000 —2,000 -2,000
Production volume , 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000
Unit production cost ~0.4 ~0,4 ~0.4 ~0,4 ~04 ~0.4 ~0.4 ~0.4 ~0.4 ~0.4 ~04
Sales revenue ‘ 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000
Sales volume 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000
Unit price 0.8 0.8 0.8 08 0.8 0.8 0.8 0,8 0.8 0.8 0.8

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 7-5 Merging the project financials and schedule into a cash ﬂow table (all dollar values are in
thousands in this and subsequent tables).

by the unit price to find the total product revenues in each period. We also multiply the
unit production quantity by the unit production cost to find the total production cost in
each period. Exhibit 17-5 illustrates the resulting table.

Compute the Net Present Value of the Cash Flows

Computing the NPV requires that the net cash ﬂow for each period be determined, and
then that this cash ﬂow be converted to its present value (its value in today’s dollars), as
shown in Exhibit 17-6. Consider, for example, the calculations for year 3, first quarter:

1. The period cash ﬂow is the sum of inﬂows and outﬂows:

 

Marketing cost
Product revenues
Production cost
Period cash flow

$ —250,000

4,000,000
—2,000,000
$1,750,000

 

2. The present value of this period cash ﬂow discounted at 10 percent per year (2.5
percent per quarter) back to the first quarter of year 1 (a total of eight quarters) is359

Product Development Economics

 

 

 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
($ values in thousands) Q1 02 Q3 Q4 01 C12 03 Q4 Q1 02 O3 04 Q1 02 Q3 04
Development cost 4,250 4,250 ~1 ,250 71,250
Rampiup cost 71,000 71.000
Marketing 81 Support Cost —250 —250 —250 —250 —250 —250 —250 —250 —250 —250 —250 —250
Production cost —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —Z,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000
Production volume 5000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000
Unit production cost ‘04 —0,4 —0,4 —0.4 —O.4 —0,4 —0.4 —0.4 —0.4 —0,4 —0.4
Sales revenue 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000
Sales volume 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 6,000 5,000 5,000 6,000 5,000
Unit price 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0,8 0.8 0.8 0,8 0.8
Period Cash Flow 4,250 71,250 71,250 4,250 4,250 7 1,750 7 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 ‘ 1,750
PV Year 1. r = 10% -‘l,250 —1,220 —1,190 -2,089 -‘l,132 1,547 1,509 1,472 I 1,436 1,401 1,367 1,334 1,301 1,269 1,239 1,208
Proiect NPV 3.203

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 7-6

Total cash ﬂows, present values, and net present value.

$1,436,306. (The concepts of present value, net present value, and discount rate are
reviewed in Appendix A.)

W

1 0258 2 $1,436,306

3. Project NPV is the sum of the discounted cash ﬂows for each of the periods, or
$8,203,000. (Here and in the rest of the chapter we round financial figures to the near-
est one thousand dollars.)

The Base-Case Financial Model Can Support Go/No-Go
Decisions and Major Investment Decisions

The NPV of this project, according to the base-case model, is positive, so the model sup-
ports and is consistent with the decision to proceed with development. Such modeling can
also be used to support major investment decisions. Say, for example, that Polaroid was
deciding between two different production facilities with different ramp-up, production,
and support costs. The team could develop a model for each of the two scenarios and then
compare the NPVs. The scenario with the higher NPV would better support the invest-
ment decision. We now consider sensitivity analysis as a technique for readily understand-
ing multiple scenarios for ongoing product development decisions.

Step 2: Perform Sensitivity Analysis

Sensitivity analysis uses the financial model to answer “what if” questions by calculating
the change in NPV corresponding to a change in the factors included in the model.
Both internal and external factors inﬂuence project value. Internal factors are those over
which the development team has a large degree of inﬂuence, including development pro-
gram expense, development speed, production cost, and product performance. External
factors are those that the team cannot arbitrarily change, including the competitive360 Chapter 17

EXHIBIT 1 7-7

Key factors
inﬂuencing
product
development
profitability.

 

Internal Factors External Factors

0 Development 0 Product Price

Expense PRODUCT 0 Sales Volume
Investigation cost —> DEVELOPMENT 4— 0 Competitive
Development cost PROJECT Environment

0 Development Speed
Investigation time

Development time
0 Production Cost l

 

 

 

0 Product Performance

Net Present Value

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
i$ values in thousands) Q1 02 03 O4 O1 O2 03 04 0.1 02 O3 04 Q1 02 03 04
Development cost —1,000 —1,000 —1,000 —1,000
Rampaup cost 71,000 71,000
Marketing 81 support cost ~250 ~250 7250 ~250 A250 4250 —250 -250 ~250 ~250 A250 ‘ -250
Production cost —2.000 —2.000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 ‘ —2,000
Production volume 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000
Unit production cost —-0.4 —0.4 ~04 ~04 -0,4 —0,4 —0.4 ~04 -0,4 —0,4 —0.4
Sales revenue 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000
Sales volume 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000
Unit price 08 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 ‘ 0.8
Period Cash Flow —1,000 —1,000 —1,000 —2,000 —1,250 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750
PV Year 1, r = 10% —1,000 ~976 —952 —1,857 —1,132 1,547 1.509 1,472 1,436 1,401 1,367 1,334 1,301 1,269 1,239 ‘ 1,208
Project NPV 9,167

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 7-8

CI-700 financial model with 20 percent decrease in development spending.

environment (e.g., market response, actions of competitors), sales volume, and product
price. (There may be disagreement over whether price is an internal or external factor. In
either case, there is little disagreement that price is strongly inﬂuenced by the prices of
competitive products and that it is coupled to sales volume.) While external factors are
not directly controlled by product development teams, they are often inﬂuenced by the
internal factors. The external and internal factors are shown in Exhibit 17-7.

Development Cost Example

As a first example, let us consider the sensitivity of NPV to changes in development cost.
By making incremental changes to development cost while holding other factors constant,
we can see the incremental impact on project NPV For example, what will be the change
in NPV if development cost is decreased by 20 percent? A 20 percent decrease would
lower the total development spending from $5 million to $4 million. If development time
remains one year, then the spending per quarter would decrease from $1.25 million to
$1 million. This change is simply entered in the model and the resulting NPV is calcu-
lated. This change to the CI-700’s base-case model is shown in Exhibit 17-8.Product Development Economics 361

 

Change in
Development
Cost, "/0

50
20
10
base
—1 O
—20
—50

Development Change in Change in
Cost, Development Change in NPV, NPV,

S Thousands Cost, S Thousands NVP, % S Thousands S Thousands
7,500 2,500 —29.4 5,791 —2,41 2
6,000 1,000 —11.8 7,238 —964
5,500 500 —5.9 7,721 —482
5,000 base 0.0 8,203 0
4,500 —500 5.9 8,685 482
4,000 —1,000 11.8 9,167 964
2,500 —2,500 29.4 10,615 2,412

 

EXHIBIT 1 7-9

CI-700’s development cost sensitivities.

A 20 percent decrease in development cost will increase NPV to $9,167,000. This
represents a dollar increase of $964,000 and a percentage increase of 11.8 in NPV. This
is an extremely simple case: we assume we can achieve the same project goals by spend-
ing $1 million less on development, and we therefore have increased the project value
by the present value of the $1 million in savings accrued over a time period of one year.
The CI-700 development cost sensitivity analysis for a range of changes is shown in
Exhibit 17-9. The values in the table are computed by entering the changes correspond-
ing to each scenario into the base-case model and noting the results. It is often useful to
know the absolute dollar changes in NPV as well as the relative percentage changes, so
we show both in the sensitivity table.

Development Time Example

As a second example, we calculate the development time sensitivities for the CI-700
model. Consider the impact on project NPV of a 25 percent increase in development
time. A 25 percent increase in development time would raise the time from four quarters
to five quarters. This increase in development time would also delay the start of produc-
tion ramp-up, marketing efforts, and product sales. To perform the sensitivity analysis, we
must make several assumptions about the changes. We assume the same total amount of
development cost, even though we will increase the time period over which the spending
occurs, thus lowering the rate of spending from $1.25 million to $1.0 million per quarter.
We also assume that there is a fixed window for sales, which starts as soon as the product
enters the market and ends in the fourth quarter of year 4. In effect, we assume we can sell
product from the time we are able to introduce it until a fixed date in the future. Note that
these assumptions are unique to this development project. Different product development
projects would require different assumptions as appropriate. For example, we might have
instead assumed that the sales window simply shifts in time by one quarter. The change to
the Cl-700’s financial model is shown in Exhibit 17-10.

Exhibit 17-11 presents the development time sensitivities for a range of changes. We
can see that a 25 percent increase in development time will decrease NPV to $6,764,000.
This represents a decrease in NPV of $1,439,000, or 17.5 percent.

We recommend that sensitivities be computed for each of the external and internal fac-
tors, with the exception of the competitive environment, which is not explicitly contained
in the base-case model. These sensitivity analyses inform the team about which factors362 Chapter 17

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
($ values in thousands) 01 02 Q3 04 01 02 03 04 01 C12 03 0.4 01 02 Q3 04
Development cost 71,000 71,000 71,000 71,000 71,000
Rampaup cost 71,000 71,000
Marketing 81 support cost ~250 —250 —250 —250 -250 —250 ~250 -250 ~250 —250 —250
Production cost —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000 —2,000
Production volume 5.000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000
Unit production cost —0.4 —0.4 —0.4 —0,4 —0.4 —O,4 —0.4 —O.4 —O,4 —0.4
Sales revenue 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000
Sales volume 5.000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 6,000 5,000
Unit price 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0,8 0.8 0,8 0.8
Period Cash Flow 4,000 —1,000 —1,000 —1,000 -2,000 —1,250 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 r 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750 1,750
PV Year 1. r = 10% —1,000 -976 —952 -929 —1,812 —1,105 1.509 1,472 1,436 1,401 1,367 1,334 1,301 1,269 1,239 1,208
Proiect NPV 6.764
EXHIBIT 1 7-1 0 CI-700 financial model with 25 percent increase in development time.
Change in Development Change in Change in
Development Time, Development Change in NPV, NPV,
Time, % Quarters Time, Quarters NVP, % S Thousands S Thousands
50 6 2 —34.6 5,363 —2,840
25 5 1 —17.5 6,764 —1,439
base 4 base —0.0 8,203 O
—25 3 —1 18.0 9,678 1,475
—10 2 —2 36.4 11,190 2,987

 

EXHIBT 17-1 1

CI-700’s development time sensitivities.

in the model have a substantial inﬂuence on NPV This information is useful in helping
the team understand which factors should be studied in more detail in order to refine and
improve the base-case model. The information is also useful in supporting the operating
decisions of the team, as discussed in the next step.

Sensitivity analysis shows that NPV is highly dependent on uncertainties in some
base-case input values and less dependent on others. In addition, some of the input values
used to compute the base case are more uncertain than others. For example, forecasted
sales volume may be more uncertain than estimated unit production cost. By assuming a
range of high and low values for any uncertain inputs in the financial analysis, the team
can compute a range of possible values for NPV The high and low values can be thought
of as defining the range within which the team is highly confident the actual outcomes
will fall. This analysis can be summarized in a tornado chart, showing the effect of each
uncertainty on NPV

For the CI-700 project, key uncertainties include the range of input values given in
Exhibit 17-12. Changing these inputs in the model one at a time, holding everything else
constant, yields the listed changes in NPV. Exhibit 17-13 shows these results graphically
as a tornado chart.Product Development Economics 363

 

Nominal % %
Model Value Mininum % Resulting Change Maximum % Resulting Change
Parameter $ thousands Value Change NPV NPV Value Change NPV NPV
Development —1,250 —1,000 —20 9,167 12 —1,500 20 7,239 —12
cost
Ramp-up —1,000 —750 —25 8,662 6 —1,250 25 7,744 —6
cost
Marketing & —250 —200 —20 8,679 6 —325 30 7,488 —9
support cost
Sales volume 5,000 2,500 —50 —41 7 —105 7,500 50 16,822 105
Unit —0.4 —0.36 —10 9,927 21 —0.44 10 6,479 —21
production
cost
Unit price 0.8 0.6 —25 —417 —105 0.8 0 8,203 0

 

EXHIBIT 1 7-1 2 Assumptions about minimum and maximum values for the model parameters and their impact on NPV.

Change in NPV
—100% 0 100%

Unit production cost -

Development cost

Marketing & support cost

 

Ramp—up cost

 

 

EXHIBIT 1 7-1 3 Tornado chart illustrating the percentage change in NPV for minimum and
maximum values for some of the model parameters, as listed in Exhibit 17-1 1. Parameters are
shown in order of decreasing impact, giving the graph its tornado shape.

Step 3: Use Sensitivity Analysis to Understand Project Trade-Offs

Why would a product development team want to change the factors under its control?
For instance, why should development time be increased if the change lowers the NPV of
the project? Typically, the development team will make such a change only if some other
offsetting gain is expected, such as a better-quality product with higher sales volumes. We
therefore need to understand the relative magnitude of these financial interactions.364 Chapter 17

EXHIBIT
17-14

Potential
interactions
between
internally driven
factors.

Adapted from Smith
and Reinertsen, 1997

Development Product
Time Cost

Product Development
Performance Cost

 

Six Potential Interactions

Development teams attempt to manage six potential interactions between the internally
driven factors. These potential interactions are shown schematically in Exhibit 17-14. The
potential interaction between any two internal factors depends on the characteristics
of the specific product context. In many cases the interactions are trade-offs. For example,
decreasing development time may lead to lower product performance. Increased product
performance may require additional product cost. However, some of these interactions are
more complex than a simple trade-off. For example, decreasing product development time
may require an increase in development spending, yet extending development time may
also lead to an increase in cost if the extension is caused by a delay in a critical task rather
than by a planned extension of the schedule.

In general, these interactions are important because of the linkage between the internal
factors and the external factors. For example, increasing development cost or time may
enhance product performance and therefore increase sales volume or allow higher prices.
Decreasing development time may allow the product to reach the market sooner and thus
increase sales volume.

While accurate modeling of externally driven factors (e.g., price, sales volume) is
often very difficult, the quantitative model can nevertheless support decision making. Re-
call from our initial examples that the CI-700 development team was considering increas-
ing development spending in order to develop a higher-quality product, which they hoped
would lead to greater sales volume. The quantitative model can support this decision by
answering the question of how much the sales volume would have to increase to justify
the additional spending on development. We have calculated the sensitivity of NPV to
changes in development cost (see Exhibit 17-9). We can also calculate the sensitivity of
NPV to changes in sales volume (Exhibit 17-15). Say that the CI-700 development team
is considering a 10 percent increase in development cost. From Exhibit 17-9 we found
that this increase in spending will decrease NPV by 5.9 percent.

Now, what increase in volume would be necessary to at least compensate for the
decrease in NPV? From Exhibit 17-15 we know that a 10 percent increase in sales vol-
ume would increase NPV by 21 percent. It follows, under assumptions of linearity, that a

2.8 percent M
21.0

summarize, a 10 percent increase in development cost would decrease NPV by 5.9
percent. A 2.8 percent increase in sales volume is needed to offset the drop. While the

J increase in sales volume would increase NPV by 5.9 percent. ToProduct Development Economics 365

 

Change
in Sales
Volume, °/o

3O
20
10
base
—1 O
—20
—30

Sales Change Change in
Volume, in Sales Change in NPV, NPV,

S Thousands Volume NVP, % S Thousands S Thousands
6,500 1,500 63.0 13,375 5,172
6,000 1,000 42.0 11,651 3,448
5,500 500 21.0 9,927 1,724
5,000 base 0.0 8,203 0
4,500 —500 —21.0 6,479 —1,724
4,000 —1,000 —42.0 4,755 —3,448
3,500 —1,500 —63.0 3,031 —5,172

 

EXHIBIT 1 7-1 5

CI-700’s sales volume sensitivities.

 

 

Factor Trade-Off Rule Comments

Development time $480,000 per month change Assumes a fixed window of opportunity
for sales.

Sales volume $1,724,000 per 10% change Increasing sales is a powerful way to
increase profits; 10% is 500 units/quarter.

Product cost or sales price $43,000 per $1 change in cost or price A $1 increase in price or a $1 decrease in

Development cost

cost; each results in a $1 increase in unit
profit margins.

$482,000 per 10% change A dollar spent or saved on development
is worth the present value of that dollar;
10% is $500,000.

 

EXHIBIT 1 7-1 6

Trade-off rules for the CI-700 project.

precise impact of the increased development spending on sales volume is not known,
the model does provide a helpful guide for what magnitude of sales volume increase is
needed to sustain particular increases in development cost.

Trade-Off Rules

The near linearity of many sensitivity analyses allows the team to compute some trade-oﬂ
rules to inform day-to-day decision making. These rules take the form of the cost per unit
change in the internal and external factors. For example, what is the cost of a one-month
delay in development time? What is the cost of a 10 percent development budget overrun?
What is the cost of a $1 per unit increase in manufacturing cost? The trade-off rules are
easily computed from the base-case model and can be used to inform the team of the rela-
tive magnitude of the sensitivities of the project profitability on factors under its control.
Exhibit 17-16 contains the rules for the CI-700.

The trade-off rules inform the original questions posed in the chapter introduction. The
team decided that waiting for software that would allow the printer to be used with both
Apple Macintosh and Microsoft Windows operating systems would delay product intro-
duction by two months. It was calculated that the delay would have an approximate cost of
$960,000. Rather than wait, the team reasoned that it could introduce the product before
all printer drivers were available as long as the drivers were offered as soon as they were
available. The media development group at Polaroid estimated that the development of a366 Chapter 17

new print medium would cost more than $1 million and would take at least one year. The
team decided that these time and budget penalties did not warrant the marginal increase
in print size and quality that would be enabled by the new medium. Finally, the team felt
that the reliability of the product could be dramatically improved with the addition of
only one engineer and one technician to the team. This additional cost was expected to
be approximately $100,000 for the remainder of the project. The team noted that they would
have to increase sales by only 0.6 percent to justify this investment. Reliability was iden-
tified as a key customer need, and so the team chose to aggressively pursue increased
reliability.

Limitations of Quantitative Analysis

Financial modeling and sensitivity analysis are powerful tools for supporting product
development decisions, but these techniques have important limitations. One school of
thought believes that rigorous financial analyses are required to bring discipline and
control to the product development process. However, detractors argue that quantitative
analysis suffers from some of the following problems:

° It focuses only on measurable quantities. Quantitative techniques like NPV empha-

size and rely on that which is measurable. However, many critical factors impacting
product development projects are difficult to measure accurately. In effect, quantitative
techniques encourage investment in measurable assets and discourage investment in
intangible assets.

It depends on validity of assumptions and data. Product development teams may be
lulled into a sense of security by the seemingly precise result of an NPV calculation.
Financial analyses such as the ones we have shown in this chapter may seem to provide
precise estimates of product development project value. However, such precision in no
way implies accuracy. We can develop a highly sophisticated financial model of a
product development project that computes project NPV to the fifth decimal place; yet
if the assumptions and data of our model are not correct, the value calculated will not
be correct. Consider the CI-700 development time sensitivity example’s assumption of
a fixed product sales window. This assumption was useful, but its integrity can easily
be questioned. Indeed, a different assumption could give dramatically different results.

° Bureaucracy reduces productivity. Detractors of financial analysis assert that such

activities provide a high level of planning and control at the expense of product devel-
opment productivity. According to detractors, extensive planning and review guarantee
that a brilliantly conceived, well-engineered product will reach the market after its
market window has already closed. Detractors also argue that overzealously applied
“professional” management techniques stiﬂe the product development process. Poten-
tially productive development time is devoted to preparation of analyses and meetings.
The cumulative effect of this planning and review can be a ballooning development
process.

These concerns are generally quite valid. However, in our opinion, they are largely as-

sociated with the blind application of the results of the quantitative analysis or arise from
the combination of financial analysis with an already stiﬂing bureaucracy. We reject the
notion that quantitative analysis should not be done just because problems can arise from
the blind application of the results. Rather, development teams should understand theProduct Development Economics 367

strengths and limitations of the techniques and should be fully aware of how the models
work and on what assumptions they are based. Furthermore, qualitative analysis, as dis-
cussed in the next section, can remedy some of the inherent weaknesses in the quantita-
tive techniques.

Step 4: Consider the Influence of the Qualitative Factors
on Project Success

EXHIBIT

1 7-1 7

The broader
context of a
development
project.

Many factors inﬂuencing development projects are difficult to quantify because they are
complex or uncertain. We refer to such factors as qualitative factors. After providing a
conceptual framework for qualitative analysis, we use examples from the CI-700 to illus-
trate how the analysis is carried out.

Consider the following questions about the CI-700 project: Will knowledge gained
from the CI-700 development spill over and be of benefit to other Polaroid development
projects? How will competitors react to the introduction of the CI-700? Will competitors
modify their own development efforts in response to Polaroid’s actions? Will there be
significant ﬂuctuations in the dollar/yen exchange rate that would change the cost of
component parts?

Our quantitative model implicitly accounts for these and many other issues with sev-
eral broad assumptions. The model assumes that decisions made by the project team do
not affect actions of groups external to the project, or alternatively that the external forces
do not change the team’s actions. This important assumption of our model is common to
many other financial models and is called the ceteris paribus (other things being equal)
assumption.

Projects Interact with the Firm, the Market,
and the Macro Environment

Decisions made within a project in general do have important consequences for the firm
as a whole, for competitors and customers in the market, and even for the macroeconomic
(macro) environment in which the market operates (Exhibit 17-17). Similarly, events and
actions outside of a development project often significantly impact its value. Qualitative
analysis focuses largely on these interactions. The most basic approach to qualitative
analysis is to consider (1) the interactions between the project and the firm as a whole,
(2) the interactions between the project and the market in which the product will be sold,
and (3) the interactions between the project and the macro environment.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Macro Environment368 Chapter 17

Interactions between the Project and the Firm as a Whole

One assumption embedded in the quantitative model is that firm profit will be maximized
if project profit is maximized. However, development decisions must be made in the con-
text of the firm as a whole. The two key interactions between the project and the firm are
externalities and strategic fit.

° Externalities: An extemality is an “unpriced” cost or benefit imposed on one part of
the firm by the actions of a second; costs are known as negative externalities and
benefits as positive externalities. As an example of a positive extemality, development
learning on one project may benefit other current or future projects but is paid for by
the first project. How should the other projects account for such benefits gained at no
additional cost? How should the first project account for resources spent that benefit
not only itself, but also other current or future projects?

° Strategic ﬁt: Decisions of the development team must not only benefit the project,
but also be consistent with the firm’s overall product plan and technology strategy. For
example, how well does a proposed new product, technology, or feature fit with the
firm’s resources and objectives? Is it compatible with the firm’s emphasis on technical
excellence? Is it compatible with the firm’s emphasis on uniqueness?

Because of their complexity and uncertainty, externalities and strategic fit are very dif-
ficult to quantify. This does not mean these issues should not be considered; rather, they
must be considered qualitatively. See Chapter 4, Product Planning, for discussion of some
strategic planning issues that cut across multiple projects.

Interactions between the Project and the Market

We have modeled explicitly only price and volume as the key externally driven factors.
In effect, we have held the actions and reactions of the market constant. To model project
value accurately, we must relax the ceteris paribus assumption to recognize that a devel-
opment team’s decisions impact the market and that market events impact the develop-
ment project. The market environment is impacted by the actions of not only the develop-
ment team but also three other groups:

° Competitors: Competitors may provide products in direct competition or products that
compete indirectly as substitutes.

° Customers: Customers’ expectations, incomes, or tastes may change. Changes may be
independent or may be driven by new conditions in markets for complementary or sub-
stitute products.

° Suppliers: Suppliers of inputs to the new product are subject to their own markets’
competitive pressures. These pressures may, indirectly through the value chain, impact
the new product.

Actions and reactions of these groups most often impact expected price and volume,
but they can have second-order effects as well. For example, consider a new competitor
that has rapid product development cycles and that seems to value market share rather
than short-term profitability. Clearly, the entrance of such a new competitor would change
our expected price and volume. Further, we may attempt to accelerate our own develop-
ment efforts in response. Thus, the competitor’s actions may impact not only our sales
volume forecasts but also our planned development schedule.Product Development Economics 369

Interactions between the Project and the Macro Environment
We must relax the ceteris paribus assumption to take into account key macro factors:

° Major economic shifts: Examples of typical major economic shifts that impact the
value of development projects are changes in foreign exchange rates, materials prices,
or labor costs.

° Government regulations: New regulations can destroy a product development op-
portunity. On the other hand, a shift in the regulatory structure of an industry can also
spawn entire new industries.

° Social trends: As with government regulations, new social concerns such as in-
creased environmental awareness can also destroy existing industries or create new
ones.

Macro factors can have important impacts on development project value. However, these
effects are difficult to model quantitatively because of inherent complexity and uncertainty.

The product development team for the CI-700 faced many qualitative issues during de-
velopment of the product. We present three of the key qualitative issues that the Polaroid
team encountered and describe the impacts of these issues on the project. The examples
illustrate not only the limitations of quantitative analysis but also the importance of quali-
tative analysis.

Carrying Out Qualitative Analysis

For most project teams, the most appropriate qualitative analysis method is simply to
consider and discuss the interactions between the project and the firm, the project and
the market, and the project and the macro environment. Then the team considers these
interactions in concert with the results of the quantitative analysis in order to determine
the most appropriate relative emphasis on development speed, development expense,
manufacturing cost, and product performance. We provide three examples below of the
qualitative analysis for the Cl-700.

While we believe this informal approach is most appropriate for decisions made at the
level of the project team, more structured techniques are available, including strategic
analysis, game theory, and scenario analysis techniques. References for each of these
techniques are included in the bibliography.

Example 1: Decrease in the Price of a Substitute Product

Color laser printers are a substitute product for the Cl-700. While color laser printers are
more costly than the Cl-700, they limit the potential of the Cl-700’s market by placing a
ceiling on the price Polaroid can charge. During the Cl-700 development, manufactur-
ers of color laser printers achieved several important technological breakthroughs. The
advances allowed the manufacturers to offer color laser printers at significantly lower
prices. The Polaroid team was faced with a change in the competitive environment that
was caused by others and that invalidated fundamental assumptions of the financial
model for the Cl-700.

In this example, it is clear that the CI-700 project cannot be considered in isolation.
The original sales volume forecasts incorporated implicit assumptions about the color
laser printer market, but the assumptions were invalidated by advances in color laser
printer technology. While the color laser printer breakthrough would have been difficult370 Chapter 17

to predict, quantitative analysis helped the CI-700 development team understand the
sensitivity of the value of the project to this development. By using the model to estimate
the sensitivity of NPV to changes in sales volume, the team was able to quickly grasp
the magnitude of the change in project value. The combination of quantitative and qualitative
analysis convinced the team to move more quickly and to further reduce the cost of
the product for the project to remain viable.

Example 2: Increased Competition in a Complementary Product Market

The demand for the CI-700 is closely linked to the prices of personal computers (PCs).
PCs are said to be complementary products to the CI-700 because a decrease in the price
of PCs increases demand for the CI-700. Cheaper PCs both increase PC sales and allow
buyers to afford additional peripheral products such as the CI-700. Thus, a decrease in the
price of PCs would increase the value of the CI-700 project.

During the CI-700 development project, intense competition in the PC market
further increased with new entrants and rapid technological development. The Pola-
roid team was faced with a change in the competitive environment for their product.
Quantitative analysis helped the CI-700 development team understand how project
value was impacted. By using the model to estimate the sensitivity of NPV to changes
in sales volume, the team was able to quickly understand the magnitude of the change
in project value, which they hoped would partially offset the pressure from the falling
prices for color printers.

Example 3: The “Option ” Value of Creating a Good Platform Product

The CI-700 was the first product of its kind produced by Polaroid, and the development
team recognized that many of their development decisions would impact potential future
generations of the product line. For example, the ease with which future generation prod-
ucts could be built around the same basic technological platform depended upon design
decisions made in the CI-700 project. The team could choose to increase development
spending and development time in order to facilitate the development of potential future
generation products, even if doing so would not make economic sense in the context of
a single product. They chose, however, to push ahead quickly with the CI-700 without
extreme efforts to accommodate future models. The argument was that the future of the
market was so uncertain that the risk of not getting to market in time outweighed the
potential usefulness of the product as a platform for future products.

 

Summary

Product development teams must make many decisions in the course of a development
project. Economic analysis is a useful tool for supporting this decision making.

0 The method consists of four steps:

1. Build a base-case financial model.

2. Perform a sensitivity analysis to understand the relationships between financial suc-
cess and the key assumptions and variables of the model.

3. Use the sensitivity analysis to understand project trade-offs.
4. Consider the inﬂuence of qualitative factors on project success.Product Development Economics 371

° Quantitative analysis using NPV techniques is practiced widely in business. The tech-
nique forces product development teams to look objectively at their projects and their
decisions. At the very least, they must go through the process of creating realistic proj-
ect schedules and budgets. Financial modeling provides a method for quantitatively
understanding the key profit drivers of the project.

° Quantitative techniques such as financial modeling and analysis rest upon assumptions
about the external environment. This environment is constantly changing and may be
inﬂuenced by a development team’s decisions or by other uncontrollable factors. Fur-
ther, quantitative analysis, by its very nature, considers only that which is measurable,
yet many key factors inﬂuencing the project are highly complex or uncertain and are
thus difficult to quantify.

° Qualitative analysis emphasizes the importance of such difficult-to-quantify issues
by asking specifically what the interactions are between the project and the rest of the
firm, the market, and the macro environment.

0 Together, quantitative and qualitative techniques can help ensure that the team makes
economically sound development decisions.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the lntemet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

Bayus provides an interesting analysis of trade-offs involving development time and
product performance factors.
Bayus, Barry L., “Speed-to-Market and New Product Performance Trade-offs,”
Journal of Product Innovation Management, Vol. 14, 1997, pp. 485—497.

For a thorough review of discounted cash ﬂow techniques as well as option theory from a
general financial perspective, see the classic text on corporate finance.
Brealey, Richard A., Stewart C. Myers, and Franklin Allen, Principles of Corporate
Finance, ninth edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2008.

Smith and Reinertsen include a thorough discussion of how to model the economics of
development time.
Smith, Preston G., and Donald G. Reinertsen, Developing Products in Half the
Time: New Rules, New Tools, second edition, Wiley, New York, 1997.

Management literature has criticized business schools and MBA programs for their
lack of relevance. In particular, MBAs are criticized for their reliance on quantitative
techniques such as discounted cash ﬂow. This is an interesting case study reviewing
the issues.
Linder, Jane C., and H. Jeff Smith, “The Complex Case of Management Education,”
Harvard Business Review, September—October 1992, pp. 16—33.

Michael Porter’s strategic analysis techniques have become standard fare for
business school students. His 1980 text on strategic analysis has been very
inﬂuential. In his 1985 book, Porter presents a general structured approach to372 Chapter 17

Exercises

scenario analysis, a technique originally developed by Royal Dutch Shell for
planning under uncertainty.

Porter, Michael E., Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and
Competitors, The Free Press, New York, 1980.

Porter, Michael E., Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior
Performance, The Free Press, New York, 1985.

Game theory can be used to analyze competitive interactions. Oster provides a view of
strategic analysis and game theory from a microeconomic perspective.

Oster, Sharon M., Modern Competitive Analysis, third edition, Oxford University
Press, New York, 1999.

Copeland and Antikarov provide a detailed treatment of real options and analysis of
projects with uncertainty and decision points.

U)

Copeland, Tom, and Vladimir Antikarov, Real Options: A Practitioner s Guide,
Texere, New York, 2003.

. List five reasons firms may choose to pursue a product even if the quantitative analysis

reveals a negative NPV

. Build a quantitative model to analyze the development and sale of a bicycle light. As-

sume that you could sell 20,000 units per year for five years at a sales price (wholesale)
of $20 per unit and a manufacturing cost of $10 per unit. Assume that production
ramp-up expenses would be $20,000, ongoing marketing and support costs would be
$2,000 per month, and development would take another 12 months. How much devel-
opment spending could such a project justify?

. Compute the trade-off rules for the case described in Exercise 2.

Revise the tornado chart in Exhibit 17-13 to show the effect of an increase in develop-
ment time. Assume that the minimum change in development time is zero, and the
maximum change in development time is an increase of one quarter.

Thought Questions

1.

Can you think of successful products that never would have been developed if their
creators had relied exclusively on a quantitative financial model to justify their efforts?
Do these products share any characteristics?

. One model of the impact of a delay in product introduction is that sales are simply

shifted later in time. Another model is that some of the sales are pushed beyond the
“window of opportunity” and are lost forever. Can you suggest other models for the
implications of an extension of product development time? Is such an extension ever
beneficial?

. How would you use the quantitative analysis method to capture the economic per-

formance of an entire line of products to be developed and introduced over several
years?Product Development Economics 373

Appendix A

 

Time Value of Money and the Net Present
Value Technique

This appendix provides a very basic tutorial on net present value for those who are unfa-
miliar with this concept.

Net present value (NPV) is an intuitive and powerful concept. In essence, NPV is
simply a recognition of the fact that a dollar today is worth more than a dollar tomor-
row. NPV calculations evaluate the value today (present value) of some future income or
expense. Say that a bank will give an interest rate of 8 percent per time period (the time
period could be a month, a quarter, or a year long). If we invest $100 today for one time
period at an interest rate of 8 percent, how much will the bank pay out after one time pe-
riod? If we let r be the interest rate and C be the amount invested, then the amount received
after one time period is

(1 r) x C = (1 0.08) x 100 = (1.08) x 100 = $108

 

 

 

 

Thus, if we invest $100 for one time period at an interest rate of 8 percent, we will
receive $108 at the end of the time period. In other words, $100 today is worth $108 re-
ceived in the next time period.

Now, let’s say that we have invested some amount, C’, for one time period at an interest
rate r. Let’s also say that after the one time period, the amount received back is $100, and
the interest rate is 8 percent. How much, then, was invested originally? We can find C’,
the original investment, by doing the reverse of what we did in the previous example:

(1+r)>< C’ = $100

_ $100 _ $100 _ $100
1+ r 1+ 0.08 1.08

 

C = $92.59

Thus, if we invest $92.59 for one time period at an interest rate of 8 percent, we will
receive $100 at the end of the time period. In other words, $92.59 today is worth $100 re-
ceived in the next time period.

We have just shown how a dollar today is worth more than a dollar tomorrow. Of
course, $100 today is worth $100. But what is $100 received next time period worth in
todays dollars? The answer is $92.59 as we showed in the last example. Stated another
way, the present value of $100 received in the next time period is $92.59 at a discount
rate of 8 percent. So, present value is the value in today’s dollars of some income received
or expense paid out in a future period.

Now let’s look at the result of investing $100 at 8 percent for longer periods:

One time period: (1 -- r) X C = (1 X 0.08) X $100 = $108
Two time periods: (1 -- r) X (1 -- r) X $100 = (1 + 0.08)2 X $100 = $116.64
Three time periods: (1 -- r) X (1 -- r) X (1 + r) X $100 = (1 + 0.08)3 X $100 = $125.97374 Chapter 17

As we did earlier, let’s find the present value of three separate investments of $100
received after one, two, and three time periods:

One time period: (1 + r) X C’ = $100
C’ = ﬂ = $92.59
1 + 0.08
The present value of $100 received next time period is $92.59.
Two time periods: (1 + r) X (1 + r) X C’ = $100
C’ = mi = $85.7
(1 + 0.08)2

The present value of $100 received after two time periods is $85.73.

Three time periods: (1 + r) X (1 + r) X (1 + r) X C’ = $100

C, _ $100

— — = $79.38
(1 + 0.08)3

The present value of $100 received after three time periods
is $79.3 8.

We found the present value of these three separate investments. Let’s say instead that
we had one investment that paid out $100 in each of time periods one, two, and three.
What would that investment be worth today? The answer is simply the sum of the indi-
vidual present values, or $257.70. The sum of the present values is called the net present
value, or NPV NPV is the present value of all cash inﬂows and all cash outﬂows. The
present value of a cash outﬂow is just the negative of a cash inﬂow of the same amount.

We can summarize the present value calculation into a convenient formula. The pres-
ent value (PV) of an amount C received (or paid out) ttime periods from now is

= C
(1+r)’

 

PV

Some calculators have a special present value function on them that can do the cal-
culations quickly. Most computer spreadsheet programs have special financial functions
that automatically do the present value calculations. The information required for these
special functions is the future amount paid out, the interest rate, and the number of time
periods of the investment.

What Interest Rate Should We Use?

The interest rate (also called the discount rate, discount factor, or hurdle rate) to use is our
own or our company’s “opportunity cost of capital.” It is called the opportunity cost of
capital because it is the return forgone by investing in the project rather than in other in-
vestments. Stated another way, the discount factor is the reward that investors demand for
accepting delayed payment. A project that has a positive NPV must be earning more than

the opportunity cost of capital and is thus a good investment. Note that many firms applyProduct Development Economics 375

a constant hurdle rate to all their investment decisions. In recent years most firms have
been using discount factors of 10 to 20 percent.

Sunk Costs Are Irrelevant for Net Present
Value Calculations

In the context of product development decision making, costs that have already been
incurred are termed sunk costs. Because sunk costs are past and irreversible outﬂows,
they cannot be affected by present or future decisions, so they should be ignored for
NPV calculations. To clarify this point, let’s consider an example of the familiar “cut our
losses” argument: “We’ve already spent over $600 million and nine years with no product
to show for it, and you want me to approve another $90 million? That’s crazy!” While this
type of argument might sound logical, in fact the amount of money already spent is not
important for the decision of whether or not to spend $90 million more. What is impor-
tant is how much extra profit will be gained from investing the additional $90 million.
Say that the expected profit from product sales is $350 million. Let’s look at the NPV of
the two options (assume all numbers given are present values):

 

 

"Cut Our Losses" "Invest $90 Million More"

Additional amount invested: $0 Additional amount invested: —$9O
Profits from product sales: 0 Profits from product sales: 350
NPV of "cut losses" decision: $0 NPV of "invest" decision: $260
Total invested: —$600 Total invested: —$690
Total project return: —$600 Total project return: —$34O

 

 

Because the “invest” decision has a positive NPV, the firm should proceed. While it is
clear that the firm will lose money on the project in either case, the $600 million already
spent is a sunk cost and should not impact the invest-or—cut-losses decision. Of course,
the sunk cost argument is a cold analytical perspective; there is a saying that “sunk costs
are only relevant to the manager who sunk them.” Project managers with a long record of
negative total project returns may find that sunk costs are extremely relevant to their abil-
ity to get support for future projects.

Appendix B

 

Modeling Uncertain Cash Flows
Using Net Present Value Analysis

Product development projects face many perils. For example, the team may think that the
manufacturing cost for a particular new product will be $40 per unit. However, the cost
could be much higher or it might even be lower. The team does not know for sure until
the product is actually built. The team may forecast sales for the new product, but the
forecasts depend on (among other things) when competitors get their versions to the mar-
ket, and this information will not be available until their products are actually introduced.
These uncertainties that are particular to a project are called project-Specific risks. How376 Chapter 17

EXHIBIT

1 7-1 8

A situation

in which

two discrete
scenarios can
be envisioned.

should project-specific risks be accounted for? Some development teams increase the dis-
count rate to offset uncertainty about the outcomes. However, such an arbitrary increment
in the discount rate would be applied uniformly to both certain and uncertain cash flows.
Fortunately, better approaches are available if the team is able to estimate the probabilities
of uncertain cash ﬂows.

Instead of using arbitrary adjustments to the discount rate, development teams should
strive for realistic forecasting of cash flows. These forecasts can be supplemented with
sensitivity analysis to understand the impact of the full range of possible outcomes for the
uncertain factors. Project-specific risks should be considered only in the expected cash
ﬂows and not in the discount rate.

Sensitivity analysis can be performed by systematically varying the model parameters,
such as product price or manufacturing cost, to understand how critically the net present
value depends on specific values for these parameters. A basic analysis can be performed
one variable at a time, as explained in the body of this chapter, or combinations of vari-
ables can be adjusted to form realistic scenarios. A more sophisticated analysis can be
performed using Monte Carlo simulation based on assumed probability distributions for
the parameters in the model.

Note that there is a second type of risk, general market risk, which is not specific to
the project. General market risk stems from the fact that there are economywide perils,
which threaten all businesses and projects. Although entire books on calculating market
risk have been written, for our purposes it suffices to say that market risk is typically ac-
counted for by inﬂating the discount rate.

Analyzing Scenarios

Sometimes project teams face discrete scenarios that are clearly foreseeable and that will
have a direct and significant inﬂuence on the project outcome. For example, a team may
have filed a patent application on a novel and distinctive product concept. If the patent is
allowed, then the team expects to face much less of a competitive threat than if the pat-
ent is not allowed. These two scenarios can be modeled as a decision tree, as shown in
Exhibit 17-18. (In this case, there is not an explicit decision, but rather an outcome of an
uncertain process. These diagrams are nevertheless called decision trees by convention.)
The two branches of this tree represent the two scenarios the team envisions. The present
value of the project can be analyzed for each scenario taken independently. The team can
also assign a probability to each scenario. Given these inputs, the team can now calculate
the expected net present value for the project accounting for the two possible scenarios:

NPV=Pa><PVa+Pb><PVb wherePa+Pb=1

Patent Allowed
PVa = $6,500,000

Launch
Product

 

Patent not Allowed
PVb = $1,500,000Product Development Economics 377

For the situation depicted by the decision tree shown in Exhibit 17-18,
NPV = 0.60 X $6,500,000 + 0.40 X $1,500,000 = $4,500,000

This kind of analysis is appropriate when discrete and distinct scenarios can be envi-
sioned and when these scenarios have substantially different cash ﬂows.

Analyzing Scenarios with Decision Points

When analyzing product development projects, the team should recognize that most devel-
opment projects can be discontinued or redirected based on the latest information available.
Such decision points may occur at the time of major milestones or reviews. This ﬂexibil-
ity to expand or contract a project is financially valuable. The notion of decision points
with the ability to change an investment is the subject of an entire field of analysis called
real options. Copeland and Antikarov (2003) provide a detailed treatment of this subject.
Here we provide a way to think about scenarios containing decision points.

Consider the scenario depicted in Exhibit 17-19. A team is contemplating the launch of a
product in an entirely new category, which is an inherently risky type of project. The team
could just launch the project and hope for success, or it could spend time and money testing
the product in the marketplace. If it invests in market testing, the team may discover that the
product is not viable, in which case it has the option to cancel the project. Alternatively, it may
discover that the market is highly responsive to the new product, in which case it can launch
with confidence and a much higher associated expected value of the future cash ﬂows.

As a base case, the team analyzes the value of just launching the product without investi-
gation. Given the team’s assessment of the likelihood of success, the present value is $2 mil-
lion for this plan. The value of market testing followed by a decision to proceed or not can be
analyzed as follows. In this case, the team spends an additional $1 million for investigation.
After investigation there is a 70 percent chance that the team will launch the product and reap

Launch Product
with High Market Risk
0 > PV,-= $2,000,000

 

Launch Product with Low Market Risk

PVa = $5,000,000
MarketTesting

 

O
PV,-= — $1,000,000

    

Pb = 30% Cancel Project and Salvage Assets

PVb = $500,000

EXHIBIT 1 7-1 9 In this situation, the team can either launch the product immediately and face a
great deal of market risk or it can test the market and then decide whether to launch the product.378 Chapter 17

positive cash ﬂow of $5 million. There is a 30 percent chance that the team will decide to
cancel the project, reaping only $0.5 million in salvage value. Thus, the net present value of
the project is

NPV=PV,~+Pa ><PVa +191, ><PVb
= —$1,000,000 + 0.70 x $5,000,000 + 0.30 x $500,000
= $2,650,000

Based on these estimates, because the net present value exceeds that of just launching
the product without testing, the team would be better off spending the $1 million to test
the market. There are, of course, many factors that inﬂuence a decision about whether
to launch a product with high uncertainty or to perform further investigation. Economic
modeling can be used as one perspective for informing this kind of decision.CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

Managing Projects

 

Courtesy of Eastman Kodak Company

EXHIBIT 1 8-1
The Cheetah microfilm cartridge.

379380 Chapter 18

A manufacturer of microfilm imaging equipment approached the Eastman Kodak Com-
pany to design and supply the microfilm cartridges for use with a new machine under
development (Exhibit 18-1). The target specifications were similar to previous products
developed by the cartridge group at Kodak. However, in contrast to the usual 24-month
development time, the customer needed prototype cartridges for demonstration at a trade
show in just 8 months, and production was to begin 4 months later. Kodak accepted this
challenge of cutting its normal development time in half and called its efforts the Cheetah
project. Effective project management was crucial to the successful completion of the
project.

For all but the simplest products, product development involves many people complet-
ing many different tasks. Successful product development projects result in high-quality,
low-cost products while making efficient use of time, money, and other resources. Project
management is the activity of planning and coordinating resources and tasks to achieve
these goals.

Project management activities occur during project planning and project execution.
Project planning involves scheduling the project tasks and determining resource require-
ments. The project plan is first laid out during the concept development phase, although it
is a dynamic entity and continues to evolve throughout the development process.

Project execution, sometimes called project control, involves coordinating and facili-
tating the myriad tasks required to complete the project in the face of inevitable unantici-
pated events and the arrival of new information. Execution is just as important as plan-
ning; many teams fail because they do not remain focused on their goals for the duration
of the project.

This chapter contains five remaining sections. We first present the fundamentals of
task dependencies and timing, along with three tools for representing relationships among
project tasks. In the second section we show how these principles are used to develop an
effective product development plan. In the third section we provide a set of guidelines for
completing projects more quickly. After that, we discuss project execution, and finally we
present a process for project evaluation and continuous improvement.

Understanding and Representing Tasks

Product development projects involve the completion of hundreds or even thousands
of tasks. This section discusses some of the fundamental characteristics of interacting
tasks—the “basic physics” of projects. We also present three ways to represent the tasks
in a project.

Sequential, Parallel, and Coupled Tasks

Exhibit 18-2 displays the tasks for three portions of the Cheetah project. The tasks are
represented by boxes, and the information (data) dependencies among the tasks are rep-
resented by arrows. We refer to this representation as an information-processing view or
a data-driven perspective of product development because most of the dependencies in-
volve transfer of information (data) between the tasks. We say that task B is dependent on
task A if an output of task A is required to complete task B. This dependency is denoted
by an arrow from task A to task B.EXHIBIT 1 8-2
The three basic
types of task
dependencies:
(a) sequential,
(b) parallel, and
(c) coupled.

Managing Projects 381

Receive and Concept Design Beta

Cartridges

Accept Generation/
Specification Selection

 

(a) Sequential

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Produce Beta
Cartridges
Design Beta —’ Test Beta
Cartridges —> Cartridges
Develop
—> Testing —
Program
(b) Parallel

 

_, Design
Production
Cartridge

—> Purchase

Test Beta E Design
Cartridges Mold gsjignriqbelrit

l

> Design
Assembly -—
TooHng

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(c) Coupled

Exhibit 18-2(a) shows three tasks, two of which are dependent on the output of another
task. These tasks are sequential because the dependencies impose a sequential order in
which the tasks must be completed. (Note that when we refer to tasks being “completed”
sequentially, we do not necessarily mean that the later task cannot be started before the
earlier one has been completed. Generally the later task can begin with partial informa-
tion but cannot finish until the earlier task has been completed.) Exhibit 18-2(b) shows
four development tasks. The middle two tasks depend only on the task on the left, but not
on each other. The task on the right depends on the middle two tasks. We call the middle
two tasks parallel because they are both dependent on the same task but are independent
of each other. Exhibit 18-2(c) shows five development tasks, three of which are coupled.
Coupled tasks are mutually dependent; each task requires the result of the other tasks in
order to be completed. Coupled tasks either must be executed simultaneously with contin-
ual exchanges of information or must be carried out in an iterative fashion. When coupled
tasks are completed iteratively, the tasks are performed either sequentially or simultane-
ously with the understanding that the results are tentative and that each task will most
likely be repeated one or more times until the team converges on a solution.382 Chapter 18

EXHIBIT 1 8-3
Simplified
design structure

matrix for the
Kodak Cheetah
project.

The Design Structure Matrix

A useful tool for representing and analyzing task dependencies is the design structure
matrix (DSM). This representation was originally developed by Steward (1981) for the
analysis of design descriptions and has more recently been used to analyze development
projects modeled at the task level (Eppinger et a1., 1994, Eppinger, 2001). Exhibit 18-3
shows a DSM for the 14 major tasks of the Cheetah project. (Kodak’s actual plan in-
cluded more than 100 tasks.)

In a DSM model, a project task is assigned to a row and a corresponding column.
The rows and columns are named and ordered identically, although generally only the
rows list the complete names of the tasks. Each task is defined by a row of the matrix.
We represent a task’s dependencies by placing marks in the columns to indicate the other
tasks (columns) on which it depends. Reading across a row reveals all of the tasks whose
output is required to perform the task corresponding to the row. Reading down a column
reveals which tasks receive information from the task corresponding to the column. The
diagonal cells are usually filled in with dots or the task labels, simply to separate the
upper and lower triangles of the matrix and to facilitate tracing dependencies.

The DSM is most useful when the tasks are listed in the order in which they are to
be executed. In most cases, this order will correspond to the order imposed by sequen-
tial dependencies. Note that if only sequentially dependent tasks were contained in the
DSM, then the tasks could be sequenced such that the matrix would be lower triangular;
that is, no marks would appear above the diagonal. A mark appearing above the diago-
nal has special significance; it indicates that an earlier task is dependent on a later task.
An above-diagonal mark could mean that two sequentially dependent tasks are ordered
backward, in which case the order of the tasks can be changed to eliminate the above-
diagonal mark. However, when there is no ordering of the tasks that will eliminate an
above-diagonal mark, the mark reveals that two or more tasks are coupled.

Changing the order of tasks is called sequencing or partitioning the DSM. Simple
algorithms are available for partitioning DSMs such that the tasks are ordered as much
as possible according to the sequential dependencies of the tasks. Inspection of a par-
titioned DSM reveals which tasks are sequential, which are parallel, and which are
coupled and will require simultaneous solution or iteration. In a partitioned DSM, a task
is part of a sequential group if its row contains a mark just below the diagonal. Two or

 

 

 

 

 

Task ABCDEFGHIJKLMN
Receive and accept specification A A _
Concept generation/selection B X B 7Sequentlal Tasks
Design beta cartridges C X X C Parallel Tasks
Produce beta cartridges D X D ’7
Develop testing program E X X X E Coupled Tasks
Test beta cartridges F X X X F
Design production cartridge G X X X X G X X
Design mold H X X X X H X
Design assembly tooling l X X |
Purchase assembly equipment J X X X J
Fabricate molds K X K
Debug molds L X X X L
Certify cartridge M X X M
Initial production run N X X X NManaging Projects 383

more tasks are parallel if there are no marks linking them. As noted, coupled tasks are
identified by above-diagonal marks. Exhibit 18-3 shows how the DSM reveals all three
types of relationships.

More sophisticated use of the DSM method has been a subject of research at MIT
since the 1990s. Much of this work has applied the method to larger projects and to the
development of complex systems such as automobiles and airplanes. Analytical methods
have been developed to help understand the effects of complex task coupling (Smith and
Eppinger, 1997); to predict the distribution of possible project completion times and costs
(Cho and Eppinger, 2001); and to help plan organization designs based on product archi-
tectures (Eppinger, 1997).

DSM practitioners have found that creative uses of the DSM’s graphical display of
project task relationships can be highly insightful for project managers in both the plan-
ning and execution phases. The chapter appendix presents a larger DSM model in which
several overlapping phases of coupled development activities are represented.

Gantt Charts

The traditional tool for representing the timing of tasks is the Gantt chart. Exhibit 18-4
shows a Gantt chart for the Cheetah project. The chart contains a horizontal time line cre-
ated by drawing a horizontal bar representing the start and end of each task. The filled-in
portion of each bar represents the fraction of the task that is complete. The vertical line
in Exhibit 18-4 shows the current date, so we can observe directly that task D is behind
schedule, while task E is ahead of schedule.

A Gantt chart does not explicitly display the dependencies among tasks. Task depen-
dencies constrain, but do not fully determine, the timing of the tasks. The dependencies
dictate which tasks must be completed before others can begin (or finish, depending on

Tasks Completed: A, B, C, E
- Behind Schedule: D

A Recere & accept spec. Ahead of Schedule: E

B Concept generation/selection -

C Design beta cartridges _

D Produce beta cartridges
E Develop testing program

 

 

 

 

 

F Test beta cartridges
G Design production cartridge

 

 

 

 

 

H Design mold
I Design assembly tooling

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

J Purchase assembly equipment
K Fabricate molds

 

 

 

 

 

 

L Debug molds
M Certify cartridge
N Initial production run

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I I I I I I I I I I I I I
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug

Current Date

EXHIBIT 1 8-4 Gantt chart for the Cheetah project.384 Chapter 18

EXHIBIT 1 8-5
PERT chart for
the Cheetah
project. The
critical path

is designated

by the thicker
lines connecting
tasks. Note that
tasks G, H, and
I are grouped
together because
the PERT
representation
does not depict
coupled tasks
explicitly.

the nature of the dependency) and which tasks can be completed in parallel. When two
tasks overlap in time on a Gantt chart, they may be parallel, sequential, or iteratively
coupled. Parallel tasks can be overlapped in time for convenience in project scheduling
because they do not depend on one another. Sequential tasks might be overlapped in time,
depending on the exact nature of the information dependency, as described below in the
section on accelerating projects. Coupled tasks must be overlapped in time because they
need to be addressed simultaneously or in an iterative fashion.

PERT Charts

PERT (program evaluation and review technique) charts explicitly represent both depen-
dencies and timing, in effect combining some of the information contained in the DSM
and Gantt chart. While there are many forms of PERT charts, we prefer the “activities on
nodes” form of the chart, which corresponds to the process diagrams that most people are
familiar with. The PERT chart for the Cheetah project is shown in Exhibit 18-5. The blocks
in the PERT chart are labeled with both the task and its expected duration. Note that the
PERT representation does not allow for loops or feedback and so cannot explicitly show
iterative coupling. As a result, the coupled tasks G, H, and I are grouped together into one
task. The graphical convention of PERT charts is that all links between tasks must proceed
from left to right, indicating the temporal sequence in which tasks can be completed. When
the blocks are sized to represent the duration of tasks, as in a Gantt chart, then a PERT dia-
gram can also be used to represent a project schedule.

The Critical Path

The dependencies among the tasks in a PERT chart, some of which may be arranged
sequentially and some of which may be arranged in parallel, lead to the concept of a
critical path. The critical path is the longest chain of dependent events. This is the single

 

Receive & accept specification
Concept generation/selection
Design beta cartridges
Produce beta cartridges

Design mold

Design assembly tooling
Purchase assembly equipment
Fabricate molds

Debug molds

Certify cartridge

Initial production run

Develop testing program
Test beta cartridges
Design production cartridge

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Task

/

A 2

/

Duration (weeks)Managing Projects 385

sequence of tasks whose combined required times define the minimum possible comple-
tion time for the entire set of tasks. Consider for example the Cheetah project repre-
sented in Exhibit 18-5. Either the sequence C-D-F or the sequence C-E-F defines how
much time is required to complete the four tasks C, D, E, and F. In this case, the path
C-D-F requires 18 weeks and the path C-E-F requires 15 weeks, so the critical path for
the whole project includes C-D-F. The critical path for the project is denoted by the thick
lines in Exhibit 18-5. Identifying the critical path is important because a delay in any of
these critical tasks would result in an increase in project duration. All other paths con-
tain some slack, meaning that a delay in one of the noncritical tasks does not necessarily
create a delay for the entire project. Exhibit 18-4 shows that task D is behind schedule.
Because task D is on the critical path, this delay, if not corrected, will result in a delay of
the completion of the entire project.

Several software packages are available for producing Gantt charts and PERT charts;
these programs can also compute the critical path.

Baseline Project Planning

The project plan is the roadmap for the remaining development effort. The plan is im-
portant in coordinating the remaining tasks and in estimating the required development
resources and development time. Some measure of project planning occurs at the earliest
stages of product development, but the importance of the plan is highest at the end of the
concept development phase, just before significant development resources are commit-
ted. This section presents a method for creating a baseline project plan. After establishing
this baseline, the team considers whether it should modify the plan to change the planned
development time, budget, or project scope. The results of the concept development phase
plus the project plan make up the contract book.

The Contract Book

We recommend that a contract book be used to document the project plan and the results
of the concept development phase of the development process. The concept of a contract
book is detailed by Wheelwright and Clark (1992). The word contract is used to emphasize
that the document represents an agreement between the development team and the senior
management of the company about project goals, direction, and resource requirements. The
book is sometimes actually signed by the key team members and the senior managers of the
company. A table of contents for a contract book is shown in Exhibit 18-6, along with refer-
ences to the chapters in this book where some of these contents are discussed.

Below we discuss elements of the project plan: the project task list, team staffing and
organization, the project schedule, the project budget, and the project risk areas.

Project Task List

We have already introduced the idea that a project consists of a collection of tasks. The
first step in planning a project is to list the tasks that make up the project. For most
product development projects the team will not be able to list every task in great detail;
too much uncertainty remains in the subsequent development activities. However, the
team will be able to list its best estimate of the remaining tasks at a general level of detail.
To be most useful during project planning, the task list should contain from 50 to 200386 Chapter 18

EXHIBIT 1 8-6
Table of
contents of a
contract book
for a project

of moderate
complexity.

 

 

Item Approximate Pages See Chapter(s)
Mission Statement 1 4
Customer Needs List 1—2 5
Competitive Analysis 1—2 3, 4, 5, 8, 9
Product Specifications 1—3 6
Sketches of Product Concept 1—2 7, 11
Concept Test Report 1—2 9
Sales Forecast 1—3 9, 17
Economic Analysis/Business Case 1—3 17
Environmental Impact Assessment 1—2 12
Manufacturing Plan 1—5 13
Project Plan
Task List 1—5 2, 18
Design Structure Matrix 2—3 18
Team Staffing and Organization 1 2, 18
Schedule (Gantt and/or PERT) 1—2 18
Budget 1 18
Risk Plan 1 18
Project Performance Measurement Plan 1 18
Incentives 1 18

Total 19—40 Pages

 

items. For small projects, such as the development of a hand tool, each task may corre-
spond, on average, to a day or two of work for a single individual. For medium-sized proj-
ects, such as the development of a computer printer, each task may correspond to a week
of work for a small group of people. For a large project, such as the development of an
automobile, each task may correspond to one or more months of efforts for an entire divi-
sion or subteam. For large projects, each of the tasks identified at this level may be
treated as its own development project with its own project plan.

An effective way to tackle the generation of the task list is to consider the tasks in each
of the remaining phases of development. For our generic development process, the phases
remaining after concept development are system-level design, detail design, testing and
refinement, and production ramp-up. (See Chapter 2, Development Processes and Orga-
nizations.) In some cases, the current effort will be very similar to a previous project. In
these cases, the list of tasks from the previous project is a good starting point for the new
task list. The Cheetah project was very similar to dozens of previous efforts. For this rea-
son, the team had no trouble identifying the project tasks. (Its challenge was to complete
them quickly.)

After listing all of the tasks, the team estimates the effort required to complete each
task. Effort is usually expressed in units of person-hours, person-days, or person-weeks,
depending on the size of the project. Note that these estimates reﬂect the “actual work-
ing time” that members of the development team would have to apply to the task and not
the “elapsed calendar time” the team expects the task to require. Because the speed with
which a task is completed has some inﬂuence on the total amount of effort that must be
applied to the task, the estimates embody preliminary assumptions about the overall proj-
ect schedule and how quickly the team will attempt to complete tasks. These estimates are
typically derived from past experience or the judgment of experienced members of the
development team. A task list for the Cheetah project is shown in Exhibit 18-7.EXHIBIT 1 8-7
Task list for the
Cheetah project.
(This task list

is abbreviated
for clarity;

the actual list
contained over

100 tasks.)

Managing Projects 387

 

Task

Estimated Person-Weeks

 

Concept Development

Receive and accept specification
Concept generation/selection

Detail Design

Design beta cartridges
Produce beta cartridges
Develop testing program

Testing and Refinement

Test beta cartridges

Design production cartridge
Design mold

Design assembly tooling
Purchase assembly equipment
Fabricate molds

Debug molds

Certify cartridge

Production Ramp-up

Initial production run

Total

62
24
24

20
56
36
24
‘lo
16
24
12

‘lo
354

 

Team Staffing and Organization

The project team is the collection of individuals who complete project tasks. Whether
or not this team is effective depends on a wide variety of individual and organizational
factors. Smith and Reinertsen (1997) propose seven criteria as determinants of the speed
with which a team will complete product development; in our experience these criteria
predict many of the other dimensions of team performance as well:

owewwe

team.

. There are 10 or fewer members of the team.
. Members volunteer to serve on the team.

Members are assigned to the team full-time.
Members report directly to the team leader.

Members serve on the team from the time of concept development until product launch.

The key functions, including at least marketing, design, and manufacturing, are on the

7. Members are located within conversational distance of each other.

While few teams are staffed and organized ideally, these criteria raise several key is-
sues: How big should the team be? How should the team be organized relative to the larger
enterprise? Which functions should be represented on the team? How can the development
team of a very large project exhibit some of the agility of a small team? Here we address
the issues related to team size. Chapter 1, Introduction, and Chapter 2, Development
Processes and Organizations, address some of the other team and organizational issues.388 Chapter 18

The minimum number of people required on the project team can be estimated by di-
viding the total estimated time to complete the project tasks by the planned project dura-
tion. For example, the estimated task time for the Cheetah project was 354 person-weeks.
The team hoped to complete the project in 12 months (or about 50 weeks), so the mini-
mum possible team size would be seven people. All other things being equal, small teams
seem to be more efficient than large teams, so the ideal situation would be to have a team
made up of the minimum number of people, each dedicated 100 percent to the project.

Three factors make realizing this ideal difficult. First, specialized skills are often
required to complete the project. For example, one of the Cheetah tasks was to design
molds. Mold designers are highly specialized, and the team could not use a mold designer
for a full year. Second, one or more key team members may have other unavoidable re-
sponsibilities. For example, one of the engineers on the Cheetah project was responsible
for assisting in the production ramp-up of a previous project. As a result, she was only
able to commit half of her time to the Cheetah project initially. Third, the work required to
complete tasks on the project is not constant over time. In general, the work requirement
increases steadily until the beginning of production ramp-up and then begins to taper off.
As a result, the team will generally have to grow in size as the project progresses in order
to complete the project as quickly as possible.

After considering the need for specialized skills, the reality of other commitments of
the team members, and the need to accommodate an increase and subsequent decrease in
workload, the project leader, in consultation with his or her management, identifies the
full project staff and approximately when each person will join the team. When possible,
team members are identified by name, although in some cases they will be identified only
by area of expertise (e.g., mold designer, industrial designer). The project staffing for the
Cheetah project is shown in Exhibit 18-8.

Project Schedule

The project schedule is the merger of the project tasks and the project time line. The
schedule identifies when major project milestones are expected to occur and when each
project task is expected to begin and end. The team uses this schedule to track progress

 

 

Person Month: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 O 1 1 1 2
Team Leader 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100
Schedule Coordinator 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25
Customer Liaison 50 50 50 50 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25
Mechanical Designer ‘l 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 50 50 50 50
Mechanical Designer 2 50 100 100 100 100 100 100 50

CAD Technician 1
CAD Technician 2

Mold Designer 1
Mold Designer 2

50 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 50 50 50
50 100 100 100 100 100 50
25 25 25 25 100 100 100 100 25 25 25
100 100 100 100

Assembly Tool Designer 25 25 25 25 100 100 100 100 100 100 50 50
Manufacturing Engineer 50 50 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100
Purchasing Engineer 50 50 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100

 

EXHIBIT 1 8-8 Project staffing for the Cheetah project. Numbers shown are approximate percentages of full time.Managing Projects 389

and to orchestrate the exchange of materials and information between individuals. It is
therefore important that the schedule is viewed as credible by the entire project team.
We recommend the following steps to create a baseline project schedule:

. Use the DSM or PERT chart to identify the dependencies among tasks.
Position the key project milestones along a time line in a Gantt chart.
Schedule the tasks, considering the project staffing and other critical resources.

ewwe

Adjust the timing of the milestones to be consistent with the time required for the tasks.

Project milestones are useful as anchor points for the scheduling activity. Common
milestones include design reviews (also called phase reviews or design gates), compre-
hensive prototypes (e.g., alpha prototype, beta prototype), and trade shows. Because these
events typically require input from almost everyone on the development team, they serve
as powerful forces for integration and act as anchor points on the schedule. Once the mile-
stones are laid out on the schedule, the tasks can be arranged between these milestones.

The Cheetah schedule was developed by expanding the typical project phases into a
set of approximately 100 tasks. The major milestones were the concept approval, the test-
ing of beta prototype cartridges, the trade show demonstration, and production ramp-up.

Relationships among these activities and the critical path were documented using a com-
bined PERT/Gantt chart.

Project Budget

Budgets are customarily represented with a simple spreadsheet, although many compa-
nies have standard budgeting forms for requests and approvals. The major budget items
are staff, materials and services, proj ect-specific facilities, and spending on outside devel-
opment resources.

For most projects the largest budget item is the cost of staff. For the Cheetah project,
personnel charges made up 80 percent of the total budget. The personnel costs can be de-
rived directly from the staffing plan by applying the loaded salary rates to the estimated
time commitments of the staff on the project. Loaded salaries include employee benefits
and overhead and are typically between two and three times the actual salary of the team
member. Many companies use only one or two different rates to represent the cost of the
people on a project. Average staff costs for product development projects range from $2,000
to $5,000 per person-week. For the Cheetah project, assuming an average cost of $3,000 per
person-week, the total cost for the 354 person-weeks of effort would be $1,062,000.

Early in the development project, uncertainty of both timing and costs are high, and
the forecasts may only be accurate within 30 to 50 percent. In the later stages of the proj-
ect the program uncertainty is reduced to perhaps 5 percent to 10 percent. For this reason
some margin should be added to the budget as a contingency. A summary of the Cheetah
project budget is shown in Exhibit 18-9.

Project Risk Plan

Projects rarely proceed exactly according to plan. Some of the deviations from the plan
are minor and can be accommodated with little or no impact on project performance.
Other deviations can cause major delays, budget overruns, poor product performance, or
high manufacturing costs. Often the team can assemble, in advance, a list of what might
go wrong, that is, the areas of risk for the project. To identify risks the team asks what390 Chapter 18

EXHIBIT

1 8-1 0

Risk plan for
the Cheetah
project.

 

 

Item Amount
Staff salaries

354 person—weeks @ $3,000/week $1 ,062,000

Materials and Services 125,000

Prototype Molds 75,000

Outside Resources, Consultants 25,000

Travel 50,000

Subtotal $1,337,000

Contingency (20%) $267,400

Total $1 ,604,4OO

 

EXHIBIT 1 8-9 Summary budget for the Cheetah project. The production tooling and
equipment are accounted for as manufacturing costs rather than as part of the development project
budget. (Kodak figures are disguised and listed here only for illustration.)

 

 

Risk Risk Level Actions to Minimize Risk
Change in customer specifications Moderate Involve the customer in process of
refining specifications.
Work with the customer to estimate
time and cost penalties of changes.
Poorfeeding characteristics Low Build early functional prototype from

of cartridge design

Delays in mold-making shop Moderate

Molding problems require High
rework of mold

machined parts.

Test prototype in microfilm machine.
Reserve 25% of shop capacity for
May—July.

Involve mold maker and mold
designer in the part design.

Perform mold filling computer analysis.
Establish design rules for part design.
Choose materials at end of concept
development phase.

 

uncertainties could affect the project’s technical, financial, and schedule performance.
Uncertainties may relate to task timing, technical developments, market acceptance,

material costs, competition, and so on.

After identifying each risk, the team can prioritize the risks. To do so, some teams use
a scale combining severity and likelihood of each risk. A complete risk plan also includes
a list of actions the team will take to minimize the risk. It is good project management
practice to address the biggest risks as early as possible in the project. This is done by
scheduling early actions to reduce the uncertainty underlying the high risks that have been
identified. In addition to pushing the team to work to minimize risk, the explicit focus on
risk during the project planning activity helps to minimize the number of surprises the
team will have to communicate to its senior management later in the project. The risk
plan for the Cheetah project is shown in Exhibit 18-10.Managing Projects 391

Modifying the Baseline Plan

The baseline project plan embodies assumptions about how quickly the project should be
completed, about the performance and cost goals for the product, and about the resources
to be applied to the project. After completing a baseline plan, the team should consider
whether some of these assumptions should be revisited. In particular, the team can usually
choose to trade off development time, development cost, product manufacturing cost, prod-
uct performance, and risk. For example, a project can sometimes be completed more quickly
by spending more money. Some of these trade-offs can be explored quantitatively using the
economic analysis techniques described in Chapter 17, Product Development Economics.
The team may also develop contingency plans in case certain risks cannot be overcome. The
most common desired modification to the baseline plan is to compress the schedule. For
this reason, we devote the next section to ways the team can accelerate the project.

Accelerating Projects

Product development time is often the dominant concern in project planning and ex-
ecution. This section provides a set of guidelines for accelerating product development
projects. Most of these guidelines are applicable at the project planning stage, although a
few can be applied throughout a development project. Accelerating a project before it has
begun is much easier than trying to expedite a project that is already under way.

The first set of guidelines applies to the project as a whole.

° Start the project early. Saving a month at the beginning of a project is just as helpful
as saving a month at the end of a project, yet teams often work with little urgency be-
fore development formally begins. For example, the meeting to approve a project plan
and review a contract book is often delayed for weeks because of difficulty in sched-
uling a meeting with senior managers. This delay at the beginning of a project costs
exactly as much time as the same delay during production ramp-up. The easiest way to
complete a project sooner is to start it early.

° Manage the project scope. There is a natural tendency to add additional features and
capabilities to the product as development progresses. Some companies call this phe-
nomenon “feature creep” or “creeping elegance,” and in time-sensitive contexts it may
result in an elegant product without a market. Disciplined teams and organizations are
able to “freeze the design” and leave incremental improvements for the next generation
of the product.

° Facilitate the exchange of essential information. As shown in the DSM representa-
tion, a tremendous amount of information must be transferred within the product
development team. Every task has one or more internal customers for the information
it produces. For small teams, frequent exchange of information is quite natural and
is facilitated by team meetings and colocation of team members. Larger teams may
require more structure to promote rapid and frequent information exchange. Blocks of
coupled tasks revealed by the DSM identify the specific needs for intensive informa-
tion exchange. Computer networks and collaboration software tools can facilitate regu-
lar information transfer within large and dispersed product development teams.

The second set of guidelines is aimed at decreasing the time required to complete the
tasks on the critical path. These guidelines arise from the fact that the only way to reduce392 Chapter 18

Start

the time required to complete a project is to shorten the critical path. Note that a deci-
sion to allocate additional resources to shortening the critical path should be based on the
value of accelerating the entire project. For some projects, time reductions on the critical
path can be worth hundreds of thousands, or even millions, of dollars per week.

Complete individual tasks on the critical path more quickly. The benefit of recog-
nizing the critical path is that the team can focus its efforts on this vital sequence of
tasks. The critical path generally represents only a small fraction of the total project
effort, and so additional spending on completing a critical task more quickly can usu-
ally quite easily be justified. Sometimes completing critical tasks more quickly can be
achieved simply by identifying a task as critical so that it gets special attention, starts
earlier, and is not interrupted. Note that the accelerated completion of a critical task
may cause the critical path to shift to include previously noncritical tasks.

° Aggregate safety times. The estimated duration of each task in the project generally

 

includes some amount of “safety time.” This time accounts for the many normal but
unpredictable delays that occur during the execution of each task. Common delays
include: waiting for information and approvals, interruptions from other tasks or proj-
ects, and tasks being more difficult than anticipated. Goldratt (1997) estimates that
built-in safety doubles the nominal duration of tasks. Although safety time is added
to the expected task duration to account for random delays, these estimates become
targets during execution of the tasks, which means that tasks are rarely completed
early and many tasks overrun. Goldratt recommends removing the safety time from
each task along the critical path and aggregating all of the safety time from the critical
path into a single project baﬂer placed at the end of the project schedule. Because the
need to extend task duration occurs somewhat randomly, only some of the tasks will
actually need to utilize time from the project buffer. Therefore, a single project buffer
can be smaller than the sum of the safety times that would be included in each esti-
mate of task duration, and the critical path may be completed sooner. In practice, the
project buffer may only need to start with time equal to half of the shortened critical
path duration. Goldratt has developed these ideas into a project management method
called Critical Chain. In addition to the project buffer, the method uses feeder baﬂers
to protect the critical path from delays where noncritical tasks feed into the critical
path. Each feeder buffer aggregates the safety times of the tasks on a noncritical path.
Exhibit 18-11 illustrates the use of project and feeder buffers.

Finish

EXHIBIT 1 8-1 1 The Critical Chain method aggregates the safety time along the critical path into the project
buffer. Feeder buffers protect the critical path from delays. In this illustration, nominal task durations (in days) are given
for each task, and the critical path is shown with thicker arrows linking the critical tasks.Managing Projects 393

° Eliminate some critical path tasks entirely. Scrutinize each and every task on the
critical path and ask whether it can be removed or accomplished in another way.

° Eliminate waiting delays for critical path resources. Tasks on the critical path are
sometimes delayed by waiting for a busy resource. The waiting time is frequently lon-
ger than the actual time required to complete the task. Delays due to waiting are partic-
ularly prominent when procuring special components from suppliers. Sometimes such
delays can be avoided by ordering an assortment of materials and components in order
to be sure to have the right items on hand, or by purchasing a fraction of the capacity
of a vendor’s production system in order to expedite the fabrication of prototype parts.
These expenses may make perfect economic sense in the context of the overall develop-
ment project, even though the expenditure may seem extravagant when viewed in isola-
tion. In other cases, administrative tasks such as purchase order approvals may become
bottlenecks. Because in past cartridge development projects periodic budget approvals
had caused delays, the Cheetah project leader began early to pursue aggressively the
necessary signatures so as not to hold up the activities of the entire team.

° Overlap selected critical tasks. By scrutinizing the relationships between sequentially
dependent tasks on the critical path, the tasks can sometimes be overlapped or exe-
cuted in parallel. In some cases, this may require a significant redefinition of the tasks
or even changes to the architecture of the product. (See Chapter 10, Product Architec-
ture, for more details on dependencies arising from the architecture of the product.) In
other cases, overlapping entails simply transferring partial information earlier and/or
more frequently between nominally sequential tasks or freezing the critical upstream
information earlier. Krishnan (1996) provides a framework for choosing various over-
lapping strategies.

° Pipeline large tasks. The strategy of pipelining is applied by breaking up a single
large task into smaller tasks whose results can be passed along as soon as they are
completed. For example, the process of finding and qualifying the many vendors that
supply the components of a product can be time-consuming and can even delay the
production ramp-up if not completed early enough. Instead of waiting until the entire
bill of materials is complete before the purchasing department begins qualifying ven-
dors, purchasing could qualify vendors as soon as each component is identified. Pipe-
lining in effect allows nominally sequential tasks to be overlapped.

° Outsource some tasks. Project resource constraints are common. When a project is
constrained by available resources, assigning tasks to an outside firm or to another
group within the company may prove effective in accelerating the overall project.

The final set of guidelines is aimed at completing coupled tasks more quickly. Recall
that coupled tasks are those that must be completed simultaneously or iteratively because
they are mutually dependent.

° Perform more iterations quickly. Much of the delay in completing coupled tasks is in
passing information from one person to another and in waiting for a response. If the
iteration cycles can be completed at a higher frequency, then the coupled tasks can
sometimes be completed more quickly. Faster iterations can be achieved through faster
and more frequent information exchanges. In the Cheetah project, the mechanical
engineer would work closely with the mold designer, who would in turn work closely
with the mold maker. In many cases, these three would share a single computer display394 Chapter 18

for the purpose of exchanging ideas about how the design was evolving from their
three different perspectives.

° Decouple tasks to avoid iterations. Iterations can often be reduced or eliminated by tak-
ing actions to decouple tasks. For example, by clearly defining an interface between two
interacting components early in the design process, the subsequent design of the two
components can proceed independently and in parallel. The definition of the interface
may take some time in advance, but the avoidance of time-consuming iterations may
result in net time savings. (See Chapter 10, Product Architecture, for a discussion of
establishing interfaces in order to allow the independent development of components.)

° Consider sets of solutions. Iterations involve the exchange of information about the
evolving product design. Rather than exchanging point-value estimates of design
parameters, in some cases the use of ranges or sets of values may facilitate faster con-
vergence of coupled tasks. Researchers have recently described the application of such
set-based approaches to concurrent engineering at Toyota (Sobek et al., 1999).

Project Execution

Smooth execution of even a well-planned project requires careful attention. Three prob-
lems of project execution are particularly important: (1) What mechanisms can be used
to coordinate tasks? (2) How can project status be assessed? and (3) What actions can the
team take to correct for undesirable deviations from the project plan? We devote this sec-
tion to these issues.

Coordination Mechanisms

Coordination among the activities of the different members of the team is required
throughout a product development project. The need for coordination is a natural out-
growth of dependencies among tasks. Coordination needs also arise from the inevitable
changes in the project plan caused by unanticipated events and new information. Difficul-
ties in coordination can arise from inadequate exchanges of information and from orga-
nizational barriers to cross-functional cooperation. Here are several mechanisms used by
teams to address these difficulties and facilitate coordination.

° Informal communication: A team member engaged in a product development project
may communicate with other team members dozens of times per day. Many of these
communications are informal; they involve a spontaneous stop by someone’s desk, a
telephone call, or e-mail to request or provide a piece of information. Good informal
communication is one of the mechanisms most useful in breaking down individual and
organizational barriers to cross-functional cooperation. Informal communication is
dramatically enhanced by locating the core members of the development team in the
same work space. Allen (1977) has shown that communication frequency is inversely
related to physical separation and falls off rapidly when people are located more than a
few meters from one another (Exhibit 18-12). In our experience, e-mail and, to a lesser
extent, voice mail also provide effective means of fostering informal communication
among people who are already well acquainted with one another.

° Meetings: The primary formal communication mechanism for project teams is meet-
ings. Most teams meet formally at least once each week. Many teams meet twice each
week, and some teams meet every day. Teams located in the same work space need
fewer formal meetings than those whose members are geographically separated. TimeEXHIBIT
18-12

Communication
frequency versus
separation
distance. This
relationship
shown is for
individuals with
an organizational
bond, such as
belonging to the
same product
development
team.

Source: Based on
Allen, 1977

Managing Projects 395

25%

N

o

o\°
I

15% ‘—

Probability of Communicating
at Least Once per Week
6‘
o\°
|

5% ‘-

 

| | | | | | | |
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80

Separation Distance, Meters

spent exchanging information in meetings is time not spent completing other project
tasks. In order to minimize the amount of time wasted in meetings, some teams that
hold frequent meetings meet standing up to emphasize that the meeting is intended to
be quick. Other techniques for controlling the length of meetings include preparing a
written agenda, appointing someone to run the meeting, and holding the meeting just
before lunchtime or near the end of the day when people are anxious to leave. We rec-
ommend that team meetings be held at a regular time and place so that no extra effort is
expended in scheduling the meeting and in informing the team of its time and location.

Schedule display: The most important information system in project execution is the
project schedule, usually in the form of a PERT or Gantt chart. Most successful proj-
ects have a single person who is responsible for monitoring the schedule. On small
projects, this is usually the team leader. Larger projects generally have a designated
person other than the project leader who watches and updates the schedule regularly.
On the Cheetah project, Kodak provided a part-time project analyst who kept the
schedule current on a weekly basis and reported to the project team leader. The team
members understood the importance of accurate schedule projections and were very
cooperative in this effort. Schedule updates are usually displayed in Gantt chart form
(Exhibit 18-4).

Weekly updates: The weekly status memo is written by the project leader and is dis-
tributed on paper, by e-mail, or even by voice mail to the entire extended project team,
usually on Friday or over the weekend. The memo is usually one or two pages long and
lists the key accomplishments, decisions, and events of the past week. It also lists the
key events of the coming week. It is sometimes accompanied by an updated schedule.

Incentives: Some of the most basic organizational forms, such as functional organiza-
tions that use functional performance reviews, may inhibit the productive collaboration
of team members across functions. The implementation of project-based performance
measures creates incentives for team members to contribute more fully to the project.
Having both a project manager and a functional manager contribute to individual per-
formance reviews leading to promotions, merit increases, and bonuses sends a strong
message that project results are highly valued. (See Chapter 2, Development Processes396 Chapter 18

and Organizations, for a discussion of various organizational forms, including project,
functional, and matrix organizations.)

° Process documents: Each of the methods presented in this book also has an associ-
ated information system that assists the project team in making decisions and provides
documentation. (By information systems we mean all of the structured means the team
uses to exchange information, not only the computer systems used by the team.) For
example, the concept selection method uses two concept selection matrices to both
document and facilitate the selection process. Similarly, each of the other information
systems serves both to facilitate the logical execution of the process step and to docu-
ment its results. Exhibit 18-13 lists some of the important information systems used at
the various stages of the development process.

Assessing Project Status

Project leaders and senior managers need to be able to assess project status to know whether
corrective actions are warranted. In projects of modest size (say, fewer than 50 people)
project leaders are fairly easily able to assess the status of the project. The project leader
assesses project status during formal team meetings, by reviewing the project schedule, and
by gathering information in informal ways. The leader constantly interacts with the project
team, meets regularly with individuals to work through difficult problems, and is able to
observe all of the information systems of the project. A team may also engage an expert
from outside the core team to review the status of the project. The goal of these reviews is to
highlight areas of risk and to generate ideas for addressing these risk areas.

Project reviews, conducted by senior managers, are another common method of as-
sessing progress. These reviews tend to correspond to the end of each phase of devel-
opment and are key project milestones. These events serve not only to inform senior
managers of the status of a project but also to bring closure to a wide variety of devel-
opment tasks. While these reviews can be useful milestones and can enhance project
performance, they can also hinder performance. Detrimental results arise from devoting
too much time to preparing formal presentations, from delays in scheduling reviews with
busy managers, and from excessive meddling in the details of the project by those review-
ing the project.

The Critical Chain method uses a novel approach to monitoring the project schedule.
By simply monitoring the project buffer and the feeder buffers of the project (described
brieﬂy above), the project manager can quickly assess the criticality of each path and the
estimated project completion time. If tasks consume the project buffer faster than the
critical path is being completed, the project runs the risk of slipping the end date. A buffer
report therefore provides a concise update on the project status in terms of progress of the
critical path and its feeder paths.

Corrective Actions

After discovering an undesirable deviation from the project plan, the team attempts to
take corrective action. Problems almost always manifest themselves as potential schedule
slippage, and so most of these corrective actions relate to arresting potential delays. Some
of the possible actions include:

° Changing the timing or frequency of meetings: Sometimes a simple change from
weekly to daily meetings increases the “driving frequency” of the information ﬂowEXHIBIT

1 8-1 3
Information
systems that
facilitate
product
development
decision
making, team
consensus, and
the exchange of
information.

Managing Projects 397

 

Development Activity Information Systems Used

 

Product planning Product segment map
Technology roadmap
Product—process change matrix
Aggregate resource plan
Product plan
Mission statement

Customer needs identification Customer needs lists

Concept generation Function diagrams
Concept classification tree
Concept combination table
Concept descriptions and sketches

Concept selection Concept screening matrix
Concept scoring matrix

Product specifications Needs—metrics matrix
Competitive benchmarking charts
Specifications lists

System—level design Schematic diagram
Geometric layout
Differentiation plan
Commonality plan

Detailed design Bill of materials
Prototyping plan
Environmental impact assessment

Industrial design Aesthetic/ergonomic importance survey

Testing Performance test reports
Durability test reports

Product development economics NPV analysis spreadsheet

Project management Contract book
Task list
Design structure matrix
Gantt chart
PERT chart
Staffing matrix
Risk analysis
Weekly status memo
Buffer report
Postmortem project report

 

among team members and enables more rapid completion of tasks. This is particularly
true of teams that are not already colocated (although if the team is highly dispersed
geographically, meetings can consume a great deal of travel time). Sometimes simply
moving a weekly meeting from a Tuesday morning to a Friday afternoon increases the
urgency felt by the team to “get it done this week.”

Changing the project staff: The skills, capabilities, and commitment of the members
of the project team in large measure determine project performance. When the project
team is grossly understaffed, performance can sometimes be increased by adding the
necessary staff. When the project team is overstaffed, performance can sometimes be
increased by removing staff. Note that adding staff in a panic at the end of a project398 Chapter 18

can lead to delays in project completion because the increased coordination require-
ments may outweigh the increase in human resources.

Locating the team together physically: If the team is geographically dispersed, one
way to increase project performance is to locate the team in the same work space. This
action invariably increases communication among the team members. Some benefit of
“virtual colocation” is possible with e-mail, video conferencing, and other network-
based collaboration tools.

Soliciting more time and effort from the team: If some team members are distributing
their efforts among several projects, project performance may be increased by reliev-
ing them of other responsibilities. Needless to say, high-performance project teams
include team members who regularly deliver more than a 40-hour work week to the
project. If a few critical tasks demand extraordinary effort, most committed teams are
willing to devote a few weeks of 14-hour days to get the job done. However, 60- or
70-hour weeks cannot reasonably be expected from most team members for more than a
few weeks without causing fatigue and burnout.

Focusing more effort on the critical tasks: By definition, only one sequence of tasks
forms the critical path. When the path can be usefully attacked by additional people,
the team may choose to temporarily drop some or all other noncritical tasks in order to
ensure timely completion of the critical tasks.

Engaging outside resources: The team may be able to retain an outside resource such
as a consulting firm or a supplier to perform some of the development tasks. Outside
firms are typically fast and relatively economical when a set of tasks can be clearly de-
fined and when coordination requirements are not severe.

Changing the project scope or schedule: If all other efforts fail to correct undesirable
deviations from the project plan, then the team must narrow the scope of the proj-
ect, identify an alternative project goal, or extend (slip) the project schedule. These
changes are necessary to maintain a credible and useful project plan.

Postmortem Project Evaluation

An evaluation of the proj ect’s performance after it has been completed is useful for both
personal and organizational improvement. This review is often called a postmortem proj-
ect evaluation or postproject review. The postmortem evaluation is usually an open-ended
discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of the project plan, development processes
employed, commercial and technical results, and quality of execution. This discussion is
sometimes facilitated by an outside consultant or by someone within the company who
was not involved in the project. Several questions help to guide the discussion:

Did the team achieve the mission articulated in the mission statement (including strate-
gic, technical, and financial goals)?

Which aspects of project performance (development time, development cost, product
quality, manufacturing cost, environmental impacts) were most positive?

Which aspects of project performance were most negative?
Which tools, methods, and practices contributed to the positive aspects of performance?Managing Projects 399

0 Which tools, methods, and practices detracted from project success?
0 What problems did the team encounter?
0 What specific actions can the organization take to improve project performance?

° What specific technical lessons were learned? How can they be shared with the rest of
the organization?

A postmortem report is then prepared as part of the formal closing of the project.
These reports are used in the project planning stage of future projects to help team mem-
bers know what to expect and to help identify what pitfalls to avoid. The reports are also a
valuable source of historical data for studies of the firm’s product development practices.
Together with the project documentation, and particularly the contract book, they provide
“before and after” views of each project.

For the Cheetah project, the postmortem discussion involved six members of the core
team and lasted two hours. The discussion was facilitated by a consultant. The project
was completed on time, and despite the aggressive schedule, so much of the discussion
focused on what the team had done to contribute to project success. The team agreed that
the most important contributors to project success were:

0 Empowerment of a team leader.

0 Effective team problem solving.

0 Emphasis on adherence to schedule.

0 Effective communication links.

0 Full participation from multiple functions.

0 Building on prior experience in cartridge development.

° Use of computer-aided design (CAD) tools for communication and analysis.
0 Early understanding of manufacturing capabilities.

The Cheetah team also identified a few opportunities for improvement:

0 Use of three-dimensional CAD tools and plastic molding analysis tools.
0 Earlier participation by the customer in the design decisions.
0 Improved integration of tooling design and production system design.

 

Summary

Successful product development requires effective project management. Some of the key
ideas in this chapter are:

° Projects consist of tasks linked to each other by dependencies. Tasks can be sequential,
parallel, or coupled.

° The longest chain of dependent tasks defines the critical path, which dictates the mini-
mum possible completion time of the project.

° The design structure matrix (DSM) can be used to represent dependencies. Gantt
charts are used to represent the timing of tasks. PERT charts represent both dependen-
cies and timing and are frequently used to compute the critical path.400 Chapter 18

0 Project planning results in a task list, a project schedule, staffing requirements, a proj-
ect budget, and a risk plan. These items are key elements of the contract book.

0 Most opportunities for accelerating projects arise during the project planning phase.
There are many ways to complete development projects more quickly.

° Project execution involves coordination, assessment of progress, and taking action to
address deviations from the plan.

0 Evaluating the performance of a project encourages and facilitates personal and orga-
nizational improvement.

References and Bibliography

Many current resources are available on the Internet via
www.u|rich-eppinger.net

There are many basic texts on project management, although most do not focus on
product development projects. PERT, critical path, and Gantt techniques are described in
most project management books, including Kerzner’s classic text. Kerzner also discusses
project staffing, planning, budgeting, risk management, and control.
Kerzner, Harold, Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning,
Scheduling, and Controlling, tenth edition, Wiley, New York, 2009.

Several authors have written specifically about the management of product development.
Wheelwright and Clark discuss team leadership and other project management issues
in depth.
Wheelwright, Stephen C., and Kim B. Clark, Revolutionizing Product Development:
Quantum Leaps in Speed, Eﬂiciency, and Quality, The Free Press, New York, 1992.

The design structure matrix (DSM) was originally developed by Steward in the

1970s. More recently, this method has been applied to industrial project planning and

improvement by Eppinger and his research group at MIT.
Cho, Soo-Haeng, and Steven D. Eppinger, “Product Development Process Modeling
Using Advanced Simulation,” ASME Conference on Design Theory and Methodology,
Pittsburgh, PA, no. DETC-21691, September 2001.

Eppinger, Steven D., et al., “A Model-Based Method for Organizing Tasks in Product
Development,” Research in Engineering Design, Vol. 6, No. 1, 1994, pp. 1—13.

Eppinger, Steven D., “A Planning Method for Integration of Large-Scale
Engineering Systems,” International Conference on Engineering Design, Tampere,
Finland, August 1997, pp. 199—204.

Eppinger, Steven D., Murthy V. Nukala, and Daniel E. Whitney, “Generalized
Models of Design Iteration Using Signal Flow Graphs,” Research in Engineering
Design, Vol. 9, No. 2, 1997, pp. 112—123.

Eppinger, Steven D., “Innovation at the Speed of Information,” Harvard Business
Review, Vol. 79, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 149—158.

Smith, Robert P., and Steven D. Eppinger, “Identifying Controlling Features of Engineer-
ing Design Iteration,” Management Science, Vol. 43, No. 3, March 1997, pp. 276—293.

Steward, Donald V., Systems Analysis and Management: Structure, Strategy, and
Design, Petrocelli Books, New York, 1981.Managing Projects 401

Krishnan provides a framework for overlapping nominally sequential tasks, explaining
under what conditions it is better to transfer preliminary information from upstream to
downstream and when it may be better to freeze the upstream task early.
Krishnan, Viswanathan, “Managing the Simultaneous Execution of Coupled
Phases in Concurrent Product Development,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management, Vol. 43, No. 2, May 1996, pp. 210—217.

Goldratt developed the Critical Chain method of project management. This approach
aggregates safety times from each task into project and feeder buffers, allowing the

project to be tracked by monitoring these buffers.
Goldratt, Eliyahu M., Critical Chain, North River Press, Great Barrington, MA, 1997.

Smith and Reinertsen provide many ideas for accelerating product development projects,
along with interesting insights on team staffing and organization.
Smith, Preston G., and Donald G. Reinertsen, Developing Products in Half the Time:
New Rules, New Tools, second edition, Wiley, New York, 1997.

Sobek, Ward, and Liker present the principles of set-based concurrent engineering, in
which product development teams reason about sets of possible design solutions rather
than using only point-based values to describe the evolving design.
Sobek II, Durward K., Allen C. Ward, and Jeffrey K. Liker, “Toyota’s Principles of
Set-Based Concurrent Engineering,” Sloan Management Review, Vol. 40, No. 2,
Winter 1999, pp. 67—83.

Allen has extensively studied communication in R&D organizations. This text includes
the results of his seminal empirical studies of the inﬂuence of physical layout on
communication.
Allen, Thomas 1., Managing the Flow of Technology: Technology Transfer and the
Dissemination of Technological Information within the R&D Organization, MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1977.

Kostner offers guidance for leaders of geographically dispersed teams.
Kostner, Jaclyn, Virtual Leadership: Secrets from the Round Table for the Multi—Site
Manager, Warner Books, New York, 1994.

Markus explains that electronic mail can facilitate rich interactions between project team
members, in addition to traditional rich media such as face-to-face meetings.
Markus, M. Lynne, “Electronic Mail as the Medium of Managerial Choice,”
Organization Science, Vol. 5, No. 4, November 1994, pp. 502—527.

Hall presents a structured process for risk identification, analysis, and management, with

application examples in software and systems engineering. (See also Kerzner, 2009.)
Hall, Elaine M., Methods for Software Systems Development, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA, 1998.

Smith presents a 12-step process for project review and evaluation, leading to ongoing
improvement of the product development process.
Smith, Preston G., “Your Product Development Process Demands Ongoing
Improvement,” Research- Technology Management, Vol. 39, No. 2, March—April
1996, pp. 37—44.402 Chapter 18

Exercises

1. The tasks for preparing a dinner (along with the normal completion times) might include:

Wash and cut vegetables for the salad (15 minutes).
Toss the salad (2 minutes).

Set the table (8 minutes).

Start the rice cooking (2 minutes).

Cook rice (25 minutes).

Place the rice in a serving dish (1 minute).

Mix casserole ingredients (10 minutes).

Bake the casserole (25 minutes).

Frqqrhrbgosrsv

Prepare a DSM for these tasks.

2. Prepare a PERT chart for the tasks in Exercise 1. How fast can one person prepare this
dinner? What if there were two people?

3. What strategies could you employ to prepare dinner more quickly? If you thought
about dinner 24 hours in advance, are there any steps you could take to reduce the time
between arriving home the next day and serving dinner?

4. Interview a project manager (not necessarily from product development). Ask him or
her to describe the major obstacles to project success.

Thought Questions

1. When a task on the critical path (e.g., the fabrication of a mold) is delayed, the com-
pletion of the entire project is delayed, even though the total amount of work required
to complete the project may remain the same. How would you expect such a delay to
impact the total cost of the project?

2. This chapter has focused on the “hard” issues in project management related to tasks,
dependencies, and schedules. What are some of the “soft,” or behavioral, issues related
to project management?

3. What would you expect to be some of the characteristics of individuals who success-
fully lead project teams?

4. Under what conditions might efforts to accelerate a product development project
also lead to increased product quality and/or decreased product manufacturing costs?
Under what conditions might these attributes of the product deteriorate when the proj-
ect is accelerated?Managing Projects 403

Appendix

 

Design Structure Matrix Example

One of the most useful applications of the design structure matrix (DSM) method is to
represent well-established, but complex, engineering design processes. This rich process
modeling approach facilitates:

0 Understanding of the existing development process.

0 Communication of the process to the people involved.
° Process improvement.

0 Visualization of progress during the project.

Exhibit 18-14 shows a DSM model of a critical portion of the development process
at a major automobile manufacturer. The model includes 50 tasks involved in the digi-
tal mock-up (DMU) process for the layout of all of the many components in the engine
compartment of the vehicle. The process takes place in six phases, depicted by the blocks
of activities along the diagonal. The first two of these phases (project planning and CAD
data collection) occur in parallel, followed by the development of the digital assembly
model (DMU preparation). Each of the last three phases involves successively more ac-
curate analytical verification that components represented by the digital assembly model
actually fit properly within the engine compartment area of the vehicle.

In contrast to the simpler DSM model shown in Exhibit 18-3, where the squares on the
diagonal identify sets of coupled activities, the DSM in Exhibit 18-14 uses such blocks to
show which activities are executed together (in parallel, sequentially, and/or iteratively)
within each phase. Arrows and dashed lines represent the major iterations between sets of
activities within each phase.